Common Litigation Issues
Litigation issues commonly encountered in the strength and
conditioning profession include, but are not limited to, negligence,
negligent hiring, claims regarding products liability, the Equal
Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment, Title VI of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964, Title IX of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the
Rehabilitation Act, the Americans With Disabilities Act, and
intentional infliction of emotional distress.
Negligence is a tort, which is defined as a civil wrong (10). Civil
law relates to private rights and remedies that are sought by action
or suit as distinct from criminal proceedings (11). The burden of
proof for the elements of negligence (i.e., duty, breach, causation,
damages) in a civil case is the preponderance of the evidence, which
is simply the greater weight of the evidence (12). In order to prevail
on a negligence claim, each element of negligence must be proven
by a preponderance of the evidence. A claim for negligence normally
alleges a claim for damages. Damages are defined as money claimed
by, or ordered to be paid to, a person as compensation for loss or
injury (13). Recently, a substantial number of legal actions were
initiated as the result of damages incurred by athletes due to the
implementation of invalid strength and conditioning programs that
were not backed by scientific evidence or research. The
implementation of strength and conditioning programs that do not
have evidence-based foundations can result in athletes suffering
from exertional rhabdomyolysis, which can involve permanent kidney
damage. The foregoing allegation was filed on January 9, 2019, in a
complaint for negligence and heard in a court of law in the Circuit
Court of the state of Oregon when a former student-athlete filed a
claim alleging that “non-evidence based physical punishment
regimens” contributed to a permanent renal injury to the student-
athlete (23).
Another significant cause of allegations of negligence is due to the
failure to properly train an athlete who has been diagnosed with a
medical condition, where it is foreseeable that injury or death could
1792
