With heavier tires, this motion reduces the lifting speed; the tire will lose
momentum as it is elevated to hip height, forcing the athlete to “muscle” the
tire over. This position places substantially greater load on the biceps and the
risk of biceps injury, and the tire is also more likely to fall backward onto the
athlete.
Correction: The athlete should be encouraged to drive the tire forward and
move forward with the tire as it is elevated. One cue is to strike the tire with
the quadriceps at hip height and continue a forward movement pattern.
Adapted by permission from J.B. Bullock and D.M.M. Aipa, “Coaching Considerations for the Tire Flip,”
Strength and Conditioning Journal 32, no. 5 (2010): 76-77.
Log Lifting
One of the classic exercises that is a part of strongman training is
the log lift, which is essentially a version of the clean and overhead
press. Other traditional lifting movements can also be performed
with logs, such as cleans, presses, jerks, rows, squats, deadlifts, and
lunges (59, 108, 156). Logs are typically made from metal and
designed to have weight added to them while offering a midrange
grip support to accommodate a neutral grip position (108). Weight is
typically added with the use of traditional plates, which eliminates
much of the need for having a variety of logs (59).
The biomechanics of the log lift have been examined in two
studies (110, 155). Using six strongman athletes, Winwood and
colleagues (155) compared the log lift and clean and jerk, using
loads of 70% 1RM clean and jerk. Both exercises involved triple
extension of lower extremities and the production of high levels of
vertical force. The log lift produced significantly greater impulse as
well as hip and trunk range of motion but significantly less vertical
velocity and power than the clean and jerk. Such differences
probably reflected the greater challenges in rapidly moving the body
and the log due to its greater diameter than the barbell. Such a view
is supported by Renals and colleagues (110), whereby a thinner log
(250 mm [1.0 in.] diameter) allowed 10 strongman athletes to
produce significantly greater power, velocity, and force than a thicker
log (316 mm [1.2 in.] diameter).
1125
