more intense training. Based on the model presented in figure 22.6, the
conditioning activities would begin with relatively low intensities and high
volumes: long, slow distance running or swimming; low-intensity plyometrics; and
high-repetition resistance training with light to moderate resistances. Traditionally,
the preparatory period is subdivided into general and specific phases. The
general preparatory phase typically occurs during the early part of the period
and often targets the development of a general physical base (38, 69). This early
part of the preparatory period includes high training volumes, low training
intensities, and a larger variety of training means that are structured to develop
general motor abilities and skills (49, 65). The specific preparatory phase
occurs after the completion of the general preparatory phase and involves a shift
in training focus. From the training base that has been established, this phase
expands the athlete’s training base through an increased emphasis on sport-
specific training activities that prepare the athlete for the competitive period (18,
69). During the preparatory period, resistance training phases can be created to
depict more refined differences in training intensity and volume. In order, these
are the hypertrophy (or strength–endurance) phase and the basic strength phase
(89, 91).
Hypertrophy or Strength–Endurance Phase
The hypertrophy phase, which is also referred to as the strength–endurance
phase, generally occurs during the early portion of the preparatory period (i.e.,
the general preparatory phase) (24, 40, 41, 93). During this phase, the training
intensity is low to moderate, and the overall volume is high. The primary goals
during this phase are to enhance work capacity and increase muscle mass. This
development serves as the foundation for the higher-intensity training in
subsequent phases and periods (42, 43). With strength or power athletes, the
primary target might be to stimulate hypertrophic effects while increasing
strength–endurance. With aerobic endurance athletes, the primary goal would be
to increase strength–endurance without significantly increasing hypertrophy.
Regardless of the sport or athlete being trained, it is generally accepted that
during the general preparatory phase, sport conditioning activities may not be
specific to the athlete’s sport. However, as the athlete moves into the specific
preparatory phase, over several weeks the training activities will become more
sport specific. For example, sprinters may begin the general preparatory phase
with longer-distance runs (longer than their competitive distance, not traditional
distance running; for example, a 100 m sprinter may do 400 m runs to establish a
foundation) at slower speeds in conjunction with lower-intensity plyometrics such
as double-leg bounding and hopping, as well as more basic resistance exercises
that are not necessarily biomechanically or structurally similar to running (e.g.,
1595
