Phase
Action
Programming
Note: For all drills that cover a distance, set up two cones (i.e., cone A and cone B) that
are 10 yards (or meters) apart. Also, any distance measured in yards can be the same in
meters; precision is not necessary.
What is crucial to note at this point is that while the first two
phases have moved the body from a state of rest to a more
prepared state, it is still unprepared for maximal performance,
especially in activities that require high levels of force or speed
application. This is why a warm-up must include a progressive
sequence of exercises that increase the intensity of activity up to a
level that will be experienced in the upcoming activity or sport; this
is the potentiation phase. While this third phase, potentiation,
could be considered as analogous to the specific warm-up, crucially
its focus on the progressive intensity of activities is different. The
quality of muscle contraction depends on its contractile history, and
there exists a staircase or treppe effect, where consecutive
contractions result in a net increase in contractile force (47, 60). This
contractile history makes the motor neuron more sensitive to action
potentials, allowing muscle to be activated with decreased neural
input (47). This phase therefore deploys sport-specific or fitness
capacity–specific (e.g., speed and agility exercises) activities that
demonstrate a staged increase in intensity until the athlete is
performing at the intensity required for the subsequent competition
or training session. This phase is critical to subsequent performance,
especially in activities that require high levels of speed, strength, and
power, yet it is often, and surprisingly, omitted from traditional
warm-ups. Indeed, the more speed or power necessary for the sport
or activity, the more important the potentiation phase of warm-up
(17), and including high-intensity dynamic exercises can facilitate
subsequent performance (11, 14, 32, 96). Competition warm-up
should include a progression of sport-specific activities that enable
the 
athlete 
to 
maximize 
performance 
physiologically 
and
psychologically (11). For the training warm-up, this can be targeted
866
