might benefit the most are the ones who are less fit to begin with.
This notion underlines the importance of practitioners understanding
and advocating for long-term athletic development as a fundamental
concept for all youth (137).
While resistance training does not affect the genotypic maximum,
it probably has a favorable influence on growth at any stage of
development, as long as appropriate guidelines are followed (70). In
fact, regular participation in an exercise program that includes
resistance training and weight-bearing physical activities has been
shown to enhance bone mineral density in children and adolescents
(50, 221). In support of these observations, it has been reported
that elite adolescent weightlifters who regularly train with heavy
weights while performing multijoint exercises display levels of bone
density well above values of age-matched controls (41, 180). These
findings may be especially important for girls who are at an
increased risk for developing osteoporosis later in life, a clinical
condition characterized by low bone mass and an increased
susceptibility to fractures (231).
Every year, millions of physical activity–related injuries occur
during leisure time and sport participation among children and
adolescents (23, 196), and it has been estimated that more than
50% of overuse injuries sustained by children could be prevented
with simple approaches including coaching education, preparatory
conditioning, delayed specialization, adequate time off from
organized sport, and proper nutrition and sleep (23, 131, 224).
Strength and conditioning professionals can play a pivotal role in
preparing young athletes for sport and thereby minimize or offset
the incidence and severity of sport-related injuries common to young
athletes. In many cases, modern-day youth who enroll in organized
sport programs are unfit and ill-prepared to handle the demands of
their chosen sport. It has also been suggested that regular
participation in a preseason conditioning program that includes
resistance training may increase a young athlete’s resistance to
injury (53, 186, 232). However, given that neuromuscular control in
408
