could be maintained, the ability to sustain high-intensity exercise
would be improved. This is the basis for creatine supplementation in
athletes.
Creatine Supplementation
Survey-based studies suggest that the prevalence of creatine use
among athletes and military personnel is about 15% to 40%, with
use more common in male strength or power athletes (134). As a
result of their widespread use, creatine supplements may be the
most extensively studied ergogenic aid in recent history. Creatine
supplementation is reported to increase the creatine content of
muscles by approximately 20% (65, 121). However, it appears that a
saturation limit for creatine exists within muscle. Once creatine
concentrations in skeletal muscle reach 150 to 160 mmol per
kilogram dry weight, additional supplementation appears to be
unable to further increase muscle creatine concentrations (92). This
has important implications for the “more is better” philosophy that
governs the thinking of some athletes and may affect the
development of proper and realistic dosing strategies.
A typical creatine supplementation regimen involves a loading
dose of 20 to 25 grams daily for five days, or 0.3 grams per kilogram
body mass if an individual wishes to dose relative to body weight,
followed by a maintenance dose of 2 grams per day (121). If one
ingests creatine without an initial loading dose, muscle creatine
content will reach levels similar to those seen in people who do
initially use a loading dose, but reaching that muscle creatine
concentration will take longer (~30 days vs. 5 days). Muscle creatine
levels will remain elevated as long as the maintenance dose is
maintained (2 g/day or 0.03 g/kg body mass per day) (121). Once
creatine supplementation is stopped, muscle creatine levels will
return to baseline levels in approximately four weeks (65, 121).
While most of the available research involving creatine
supplementation has focused on skeletal muscle, a small body of
accumulating research has focused on creatine and potential
714
