Block and
emphasis
Training tool and notes
Load prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
Friday:
Block starts 1 × 3 × 25
m (3 min)
Speed–endurance from
two-point stance 1 × 2
× 50 m (6 min)
1 × 2 × 70 m (6.5
min)
1 × 2 × 90 m (7 min)
aEach session should be preceded by a warm-up that incorporates a range of technical
drills to work on aspects of technique in relation to both acceleration and maximum-
velocity sprinting (see sprint drills 1 to 6 on pages 675-683 for examples). These drills
could also form dedicated technique sessions as depicted in block 4 of the table.
bAn acceleration hold is a sprint drill for which the strength and conditioning professional
places a cone on the track near or slightly before the point at which an athlete’s shin
typically rises to a vertical position, which is indicative of upright sprinting. The athlete is
then instructed to maintain the speed achieved up to the cone through the remainder of
the sprint. For instance, an athlete may be prescribed acceleration holds for 40 meters, but
the coach’s mark ending the acceleration zone is placed at the 20-meter mark on the track.
The athlete then maintains that speed from 20 meters to 40 meters. This drill is used to
begin to focus on improving transitional mechanics.
cWickets are a constrained sprinting task that involves a period of sprint running whereby
the athlete appears to step over objects (e.g., mini-hurdles) in an effort to encourage high
foot recovery and optimal front-side mechanics.
Biomechanical Differences in Acceleration
Between Sprint and Team-Sport Athletes
The ability to accelerate linearly and displace the COM rapidly is essential in track
sprinting and multidirectional team sports. Track sprinters are the fastest humans
on earth, and thus examining the biomechanics and techniques they adopt is
intuitive to better understand and optimize sprinting performance in athletes. Clear
biomechanical and technical differences exist between sprint and team-sport
athletes (25, 107); however, it is important to consider that environment, task, and
performer constraints will all interact and influence the acceleration strategy and
mechanics employed and the overall execution of the sprinting skill.
1469
