program, injury, or illness. In the absence of an appropriate training
stimulus, the athlete experiences a loss of the physiological
adaptations brought about by training. It has been demonstrated
that most of the physiological adaptations attained with training
regress rapidly toward pretraining levels when the training stimulus
is removed (5, 102). To avoid some of the effects of detraining, the
use of other training modes may be beneficial; however, cross-
training may only attenuate some of the loss of physiological
adaptation normally seen during complete cessation of training.
Aerobic endurance athletes can minimize the effects of detraining by
continuing to use their primary mode of exercise at reduced
frequency and intensity, if possible (136).
Tapering
Tapering is an important component of the training program as
aerobic endurance athletes prepare for major competition. Tapering
involves the systematic reduction of training duration and intensity,
combined with an increased emphasis on technique work and
nutritional intervention. The objective of tapering the training
regimen is to attain peak performance at the time of competition.
While the duration of the taper depends on numerous factors, a
typical tapering period may last between 7 and 28 days (91).
Although most of the available research on tapering has been
conducted on swimmers (95, 126, 131), the use of tapering is not
limited to these aerobic endurance athletes. Research among
runners and cyclists has shown that these aerobic endurance
athletes also benefit from a well-planned tapering regimen (18, 91).
Tapering before competition helps facilitate recovery and rehydration
and promotes increases in muscle and liver glycogen stores (91).
Several types of tapering models may be employed by athletes in
order to restore impaired physiological capacities resulting from the
rigors of training. The most common tapering models are linear,
step, and progressive tapers (131). The linear taper is characterized
by a gradual decrease in the overall daily training volume throughout
1552
