Periodization Periods
The overall variation and structure of the program design variables within each
individual meso- and microcycle are constructed based on the periods included in
the macrocycle or annual training plan (35, 36, 38). Across these periods of the
training plan, the volume and intensity of the training and conditioning program
generally receive the greatest attention, but the time spent acquiring and
perfecting sport-specific technique must also be considered when one is
constructing the overall periodized training plan (77). Ultimately, periodized
training plans systematically shift training foci from general nonspecific activities
of high volume and low intensity toward activities of lower volume and higher
intensities over a period of many weeks or months to help reduce the potential
for overtraining while optimizing performance capacities.
The basic sequencing of periodized training programs and how training
progresses through the various phases for specified training targets are very
similar to the sequencing and evolution of learning academic concepts. For
example, in academics we start with simple concepts and skills that progress to
more complex concepts; that is, we develop simple skills to provide a sound
foundation for learning more complex items. Ultimately, the periods within a
periodized training plan serve as the pathway for developing foundational
physical, psychological, and performance attributes into more complex sport-
specific targets.
In the classic periodization literature, the major divisions of training are
classified as the preparatory, competitive, and transition periods (34, 66, 89).
Stone, O’Bryant, and Garhammer (89) modified this classic model to include a
“first transition” between the preparatory and competitive periods of training.
Based on this structure, some periodization models often contain four distinct but
interrelated training periods: preparatory, first transition, competitive, and second
transition. Figure 22.6 presents the basic periodization model described by Stone,
O’Bryant, and Garhammer (89). This model is often applied for novice athletes
with a lower training status. Generally, in this application, intensity begins lower
and gradually increases, while volume starts higher and slowly decreases as the
athlete becomes more conditioned. It is important to note that not all novice
athletes are able to tolerate large changes in these variables and that smaller
fluctuations may be required (89, 98, 99). It is also important to note that even
though these fluctuations are often represented graphically as straight lines, the
volume and intensity progressions are in fact nonlinear because of the
fluctuations in the loadings that occur at the micro- and mesocycle levels (34, 35,
77). This basic misunderstanding of the classic models of periodization has
resulted in these types of models being falsely termed linear periodization models
1593
