carbohydrates and protein provide approximately 4 kcal/g. Dietary
fats and oils are composed of different types of fatty acids.
Saturated fatty acids have no double bonds, and their carbon
molecules are saturated with hydrogen. Saturated fatty acids are
used for certain physiological and structural functions, but the body
can make these fatty acids; therefore, there is no dietary
requirement for saturated fatty acids. Unsaturated fatty acids contain
some carbon molecules that are joined together by double bonds,
making them more chemically reactive. Fatty acids containing one
double bond are monounsaturated. With two or more double
bonds, a fatty acid is polyunsaturated. Two polyunsaturated fatty
acids are considered essential, meaning that the body cannot make
them: omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids. These two fatty acids are
necessary for the formation of healthy cell membranes, proper
development and functioning of the brain and nervous system, and
hormone production. Omega-6 fatty acids are abundant in the food
supply and found in foods such as soybean, corn, and safflower oil
and products made with these oils. Fewer foods contain omega-3
fatty acids; these include fish, particularly fatty fish such as salmon,
herring, halibut, trout, and mackerel, which contain the omega-3
fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic
acid (DHA). Eicosapentaenoic acid and DHA are tied to a dose-
dependent decrease in triglycerides; a small, but statistically
significant, decrease in blood pressure, especially in the elderly; and
potential antiarrhythmic effects (106, 113).
One could also consume flaxseeds, walnuts, soybean oil, or
canola oil to meet omega-3 requirements since these contain the
omega-3 fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), which is
converted to EPA and DHA. However, this conversion process is
inefficient. According to vivo studies, approximately 5% of ALA is
converted to EPA, and <0.5% of ALA is converted to DHA in adults
(129). Therefore, while foods that contain ALA count toward one’s
omega-3 intake, they do not have a substantial effect on EPA and
DHA levels in the body. Foods rich in ALA may improve some risk
567
