FIGURE 7.1 The youth physical development model for (a) males and (b) females. Font
size refers to importance; light blue and light red boxes refer to preadolescent periods of
adaptation; dark blue and dark red boxes refer to adolescent periods of adaptation. FMS:
fundamental movement skills; MC: metabolic conditioning; PHV: peak height velocity; SSS:
sport-specific skills; YPD: youth physical development.
Adapted by permission from R.S. Lloyd and J.L. Oliver, “The Youth Physical Development Model: A New Approach to
Long-Term Athletic Development,” Strength and Conditioning Journal 34, no. 3 (2012): 61-72.
Chronological Age Versus Biological Maturation
Because of considerable variation in the rates of growth and
development, it is not particularly accurate to define a stage of
maturation or development by age in months or years, which is
known as chronological age. Children do not grow at a constant
rate, and there are substantial interindividual differences in physical
development at any given chronological age. For example, a group
of 14-year-old children can have a height difference as great as 9
inches (23 cm) and a weight difference up to 40 pounds (18 kg),
while an 11-year-old girl may be taller and more physically skilled
than an 11-year-old boy. These differences correspond to variations
in the timing, tempo, and magnitude of maturation (142). The onset
of puberty can vary from 8 to 13 years in girls and from 9 to 15
years in boys, with girls beginning puberty approximately two years
before boys.
Given 
the 
limitations 
associated 
with 
chronological 
age,
development can be better assessed by biological maturation,
which can be measured in terms of skeletal age, sexual maturation,
or somatic (physique) maturation. The assessment of maturation in
children is important for several reasons. Maturity assessment can
be used to evaluate growth and development patterns in children. In
addition, since the degree of maturation is related to measures of
fitness, including muscular strength and motor skill performance
(120), techniques used to assess maturation can help ensure that
children are more fairly matched for fitness testing and athletic
competition, as opposed to being grouped according to chronological
age. In adequately nourished children there is no scientific evidence
390
