stored during the eccentric phase dissipates as heat, and the stretch
reflex will not increase muscle activity during the upcoming
concentric phase (14). Research has shown that increasing time in
the amortization phase results in increases in elastic energy lost in
the bench press compared to no delay between eccentric and
concentric phases (energy losses were 0.35 s = 25%, 0.9 s = 52%,
1 s = 55%, and 1.5 s = 70%) (66). Consider the countermovement
vertical jump mentioned earlier. Once the countermovement has
stopped, the amortization phase has begun. As soon as movement
begins again, the amortization phase has ended.
The concentric phase, phase III, is the body’s response to the
eccentric and amortization phases. In this phase, the energy stored
in the SEC during the eccentric phase either is used to increase the
force of the subsequent movement or is dissipated as heat. This
stored elastic energy increases the force produced during the
concentric phase movement beyond that of an isolated concentric
muscle action (15, 58). In addition, the alpha motor neurons
stimulate the agonist muscle group, resulting in a reflexive
concentric muscle action (i.e., the stretch reflex). The efficiency of
these subsystems is essential to the proper performance of
plyometric exercises. Again, visualize the vertical jump. As soon as
movement begins in an upward direction, the amortization phase
has ended, and the concentric phase of the SSC has begun. In this
example, one of the agonist muscles is the quadriceps (rectus
femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, vastus intermedius). During
the countermovement, the quadriceps undergoes a rapid stretch
(eccentric phase); there is a delay in movement (amortization
phase), and then the muscle concentrically extends the knee,
allowing the athlete to push off the ground (concentric phase).
The rate of musculotendinous stretch is vital to plyometric
exercise (41). This can be influenced by the type of plyometric
activity and the ground contact technique (13). A high stretch rate
results in greater muscle recruitment and activity during the SSC
concentric phase. The importance of the stretch rate may be
1266
