intensity (71). The training induced an increase in fat use attributed
to 
the 
increase 
in 
fat-metabolizing 
enzymes 
and 
greater
mitochondrial respiratory capacity within the exercising muscles
(108).
Bone and Connective Tissue Adaptations
The selection of different forms of aerobic exercise has met with
some success in bringing about improvements in bone mass. Aerobic
programs that are the most successful in stimulating bone growth
involve more intense physical activities such as running and high-
intensity aerobics (12, 17). Running promotes bone growth more
effectively than other types of aerobic exercises such as cycling and
swimming. This is due to the repetitive high-impact loading that
occurs during running, in which the body experiences forces several
times its own weight. In contrast, cycling and swimming are weight-
supported activities that place minimal strain on the skeletal system,
resulting in less stimulation for bone growth (150). In fact, non-
weight-bearing aerobic exercise can reduce bone density, particularly
in areas not used to produce locomotion. For example, in a study
comparing athletes who were runners, cyclists, or both, it was
reported that individuals who were runners had greater total and leg
bone mineral density when compared to non-exercising control
participants, while cyclists had a reduced lower spine bone mineral
density than the non-exercising control group, and those in both
groups had greater total and arm bone mineral density compared to
non-exercising control participants (150). These findings suggest
that a sport like cycling may not produce enough strain to improve
bone mass not directly related to locomotion. As such, the inclusion
of other weight-bearing activities is likely warranted to help
counteract the potential reductions in bone mass associated with
non-weight-bearing activities (150). This research highlights that
skeletal adaptations brought about by aerobic endurance training are
specific to the activity undertaken and, more specifically, the axial
loading that the activity induces.
349
