pregnancy, and lactation) and 30 to 38 grams per day for men based
on age group. Fiber is commonly found in fruits, vegetables, nuts,
seeds, legumes, and whole-grain products such as whole-grain
bread, oatmeal, and popcorn.
Health Factors Associated With Food
Sensitivities and Allergies
A food allergy is defined as “an adverse health effect arising from a specific
immune response that occurs reproducibly on exposure to a given food,” and a
food sensitivity, also known as food intolerance, is defined as “nonimmune
reactions that include metabolic, toxic, pharmacologic, and undefined mechanisms”
(17). Reactions to food allergies range in severity from rash to anaphylaxis, which
is life-threatening (151). The eight most common food allergens in the United
States are cow’s milk, wheat, eggs, tree nuts, peanut, fish, shellfish, and soy (53);
these foods must be identified on ingredient labels to prevent adverse reaction in
affected individuals (10). Celiac disease (CD) is a type of food allergy triggering an
immune response to dietary gluten, a protein found in cereals such as wheat, rye,
and barley (97). Food intolerances, especially self-reported, are more prevalent
than food allergies (53); a United States–based survey among adults showed that
the prevalence of self-reported food intolerances was 25% (77). The most
common food intolerance is to lactose, affecting nearly 65% of the population
(53). Some food intolerances cannot be readily explained and are classified as
undefined; a well-known example of this is irritable bowel syndrome (IBS),
characterized by abdominal pain, bloating, abdominal distension, flatulence,
constipation, or diarrhea (151). Dietary management of food sensitivities often
includes elimination diets, where common trigger foods are removed from the diet,
and then slowly reintroduced (151). Individuals with food allergies and intolerances
should work with a registered dietitian to ensure nutritional needs are met.
Fat
Although the terms fat and lipid are often used interchangeably,
lipid is a broader term. Lipids include triglycerides (fats and oils) as
well as related fatty compounds, such as sterols and phospholipids.
The lipids of greatest significance in nutrition are triglycerides, fatty
acids, phospholipids, and cholesterol. Triglycerides are formed by
the union of glycerol with three fatty acids. The majority of lipids
564
