ignored, so its biomechanical relevance is misunderstood. For
example, many systems record data at 1,000 hertz, which means
data are recorded every 1 millisecond (ms). Is the rate that work is
performed over 1 millisecond relevant? Caution is urged when
considering this approach, and unless there is a specific need to
know the rate of work over a single sample, it should be ignored. For
example, the maximum instantaneous power in the previous barbell
overhead press example was 642.63 watts, which describes the work
performed in moving the barbell 1 millimeter. Nowhere is this
method more popular than in vertical jump research. Going back to
the example of the 74-kilogram, 40-centimeter jumper, the work the
athlete performs during the propulsion phase of the jump (from the
lowest squat to takeoff) is 295.57 joules, the athlete performs this
over 0.315 seconds, and so achieves 938.31 watts of power. The
peak power achieved during the same propulsion phase was 2040.68
watts, where the work performed involved 2 millimeters of
displacement (of the jumper’s center of mass).
We must mention an important limitation of using work and
power to quantify movement performance. Both of these are scalar
quantities, which means that they only provide a magnitude (how
much) and cannot consider movement direction. Considering the
importance of movement direction in sport and occupational
performance, work and power should be used with this limitation in
mind. Requiring nothing more than a tape measure and patience,
practitioners can use work to quantify training load.
Negative Work and Power
When both force and movement are positive, both work and power
will be positive too. In the earlier barbell pressing example, the lifter
applies a positive force to push the barbell upward, so both force
and movement are positive. However, while during the lowering
phase of the exercise the force remains positive (to control the
barbell’s descent), its movement is negative (because it is traveling
downward). We can use equation 2.3 to calculate the work
134
