The head should be neutral, looking a few yards or meters ahead along the
track.
Acceleration
Posture
Forward inclination helps maximize propulsive force contribution and
depends on the absolute magnitude of force available. The forward lean
gradually reduces with each step, assuming an upright position by maximum
velocity.
The pelvis position should be neutral relative to torso.
The center of mass should be ahead of the foot during early acceleration
(first few steps), which gradually progresses to the center of mass being
slightly behind the foot as the athlete progresses to maximum velocity.
The center of mass and hip position begin low and rise higher with each
step from early to late acceleration to maximum velocity.
Arms
The ranges of motion in the arms are wide to match the ranges of motion in
the lower body on the contralateral side (e.g., as the knee travels forward,
the opposite arm travels forward).
The arms are driven aggressively backward.
Legs
During acceleration each step gets progressively longer, with ground contact
times getting shorter and flight times longer as the athlete advances to
maximum velocity.
Rapid, large split of the thighs through the stance phase enhances leg
extension force while preparing the swing limb for rapid acceleration back
down to the ground, enabling high ground reaction forces (GRF) early
during ground contact.
Low heel recovery enables shorter steps and more cycle time dedicated to
force production. Heel recovery gains more height as the athlete progresses
to maximum velocity.
The path of the heel and rest of the foot tends to be piston like (backward
and downward) before progressing to a more cyclic action by maximum
velocity.
Forward-oriented shin angles gradually become more vertical as the athlete
progresses to maximum velocity.
There should be rapid deceleration of extending the thigh (back-side catch)
during the late stance to avoid prolonging ground contact and then enable
rapid subsequent recovery of the leg after takeoff.
1422
