sequenced, may injure muscles or connective tissues, especially
when there has been a previous injury (20). Ballistic stretching
usually triggers the stretch reflex that does not allow the involved
muscles to relax, which may limit ROM, so the strength and
conditioning professional should monitor this during the session.
For example, consider the sitting toe touch performed as a
ballistic stretch rather than a static stretch. The athlete sits on the
ground with knees extended, lower extremities together, and upper
body perpendicular to the legs. The athlete reaches quickly toward
the ankles, bounces at the end position, and immediately returns to
a near-vertical upper body position. With each repetition, the end
position extends farther than in the preceding repetition. Ballistic
stretching has been shown to be as effective as static stretching in
enhancing ROM (58) and could play a role in a flexibility
development program (22). However, care must be taken to ensure
that the athlete is appropriately prepared for this type of exercise
acutely and chronically, and special care should be taken when a
previous injury has been reported.
Dynamic and ballistic stretches may appear similar; however, a
number of key differences significantly alter the effects of these
activities such that dynamic stretching avoids the potential negative
effects associated with ballistic stretching. Dynamic stretching avoids
bouncing and is performed in a more controlled manner than ballistic
stretching. The result is a controlled ROM that is often smaller than
that produced by ballistic stretching but demonstrates the control
required to be able to actively move through the full ROM and
assume and hold the end position.
Precontraction Stretching
Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF) is the most
common precontraction stretching methodology. PNF was originally
developed in the late 1940s as part of a neuromuscular rehabilitation
program designed to relax muscles with increased tone or activity
(1, 81). It has since been expanded to athletics as a method of
882
