especially if combined with assessment of slow stretch-shortening cycle (SSC)
function (e.g., countermovement jump) and fast SSC function (e.g., rebound
jump) using force plates. Readers are referred to chapters 13 and 14 for more
information on athlete testing.
In the soccer athlete example provided in figure 18.3, we see that the
athlete’s peak force and relative peak force during the isometric mid-thigh pull
are average for the performances across the league in which he or she
competes, highlighting a potential area for development. In contrast, the
athlete’s countermovement jump height (45 cm) is very good compared to the
rest of the league; however, their modified reactive strength index (0.46 [mRSI
= jump height / time to takeoff]) is only average, due to a prolonged time to
takeoff (1.0 s) (figure 18.4). This indicates that the athlete generated a sufficient
impulse (i.e., force × time) to achieve the 45-centimeter jump height, using a
greater time for acceleration and therefore a suboptimal force profile. As such,
the athlete needs to emphasize strength development; as Cormie and colleagues
(26, 28, 29) previously demonstrated, strength training and the associated
increase in maximal strength result in enhanced force production characteristics
during jumping, along with reductions in time to takeoff. Finally, the athlete’s
rebound jump performance highlights a good ground contact time (163 ms) but
a low rebound jump height (22 cm), resulting in an average reactive strength
index (1.40) compared to the performances across the league (figure 18.5). The
low jump height may be due to the inability to produce high enough forces
during the short ground contact time to provide a sufficient impulse for a higher
jump height. Overall, these characteristics highlight that the athlete needs to
enhance maximal and rapid force production. As such, initially emphasizing
maximal strength for a training block, followed by a subsequent block of training
emphasizing speed–strength, may be advantageous.
1198
