mechanical message from the extracellular to intracellular region of
the tissue. This mechanical message upregulates the cellular DNA,
which in turn stimulates collagen synthesis (44). Loads may be
increased to provide greater challenge as tissue healing progresses.
The speed at which the movement occurs is controlled by the
athlete; movement speed can be a program design variable, with
more acute injuries calling for slower movement and the later
phases of healing better suited to faster, more sport-specific
movement.
Neuromuscular control is the ability of muscles to respond to
sensory feedback to maintain joint stability (85). This sensory
information is referred to as proprioception and occurs in response
to receptors in the skin, muscles, tendons, ligaments, and the joint
capsule. 
Proprioception 
contributes 
to 
the 
conscious 
and
unconscious efferent control of posture, balance, stability, and sense
of position (85). For example, when running on an uneven surface,
cross country runners rely on sensory input (proprioception) from
their lower extremities to adjust to the ground to prevent falls and
injuries. After an injury, neuromuscular control is usually impaired
due to arthrogenic inhibition, which occurs from swelling within
the joint that causes a reflex inhibition of the alpha motor neuron
responsible for muscle activation (22). Specific types of exercises
exist to improve neuromuscular control following injury and can be
manipulated through alterations in surface stability, vision, and
speed. Mini-trampolines, balance boards, and stability balls can be
used to create unstable surfaces for upper and lower extremity
training. Athletes can perform common activities such as squats and
push-ups on uneven surfaces to improve neuromuscular control.
Exercises may also be performed with eyes closed, thus removing
visual input, to further challenge balance. Finally, increasing the
speed at which exercises are performed provides additional
challenges to the system. Specifically controlling these variables
within a controlled environment that is sport or activity specific will
1650
