move freely and effectively through movements (67) and is a
dynamic quality requiring a combination of motor control, stability,
and flexibility; it more closely relates to the movement requirements
an athlete will face in his or her sport and in the general activities of
life (51). See table 15.1 for a full example of a RAMP protocol.
Debate persists as to whether static stretching should be used
within warm-up, and at present the evidence is equivocal. Some
reviews of the literature on the effect of static stretching on
performance question the practice (82, 83, 97), suggesting that it
can 
compromise 
muscle 
performance 
(53). 
Studies 
have
demonstrated negative effects of static stretching on performance in
a range of parameters such as force production (9, 23-26, 27, 31,
75), power performance (21, 92, 96, 97), running speed (35),
reaction or movement time (8), and strength endurance (70). It has
been suggested that this may be associated with a reduction in the
stiffness of the musculotendinous units caused by a change in
intramuscular viscoelastic properties (5, 40) or to a reduction in
efferent neural input to the muscles (40). However, other studies
show no decrement in performance, and a more recent review by
Kay and Blazevich (52) concludes that there is clear evidence that
short-duration static stretching has no detrimental effect on
subsequent performance unless stretches are held for greater than
60 seconds. Simic and coworkers (86) report that shorter-duration
(<45 s) static stretching bouts result in less performance decrement
but that the performance decrement still exists and may affect
competitive performance. Therefore, in deciding whether to use
static stretching within this phase of the warm-up, it is important
that the strength and conditioning professional perform a benefit–
risk analysis (59). An important factor to consider in designing this
phase of the warm-up is the types of movements and ranges of
motion required for the upcoming activity. Athletes in sports that
require greater ranges of motion may need to spend more time in
this phase of warm-up and use some elements of static stretching
that may enhance technical elements of performance that depend
863
