professionals must understand what each variable actually reflects,
how to interpret it, and how it may change with respect to the
training prescribed.
Similarly, while an athlete may be familiar with technology, it does
not mean they are used to the specific device measuring their
performance, and as such, a familiarization period may be required.
For example, it can feel foreign to run on a treadmill (active, passive,
or Alter-G) when one has not done so before. As such, coaching
cues need to be developed and provided to the athlete to ensure he
or she transitions successfully to the new technology or device. It
also should be noted that variances in technology between indoor
and outdoor equipment or differences in performance between
exercising indoors versus outdoors exist and can produce differing
results (90). For example, it has been shown that running inside on
a treadmill at slower speeds can feel easier and produce a lower
exercise heart rate than running outside at higher submaximal
speeds (90). Aerobic endurance performance was also found to be
superior outside compared to when performed indoors. The
researchers suggest this may be related to a potential fear of falling
from the treadmill at higher speeds and the potential build-up of
heat due to the absence of air flow around the body when running
indoors.
Training Zones
It is common practice in aerobic sports to prescribe exercise within
one of a number of training zones, each of which reflects a training
intensity and training goal, rather than a specific heart rate or RPE
(62, 120). The number of zones can vary, typically from three to
seven; however, the common reference point is often the athlete’s
lactate or ventilatory threshold. A low-intensity or aerobic training
zone can be associated with a stable blood lactate concentration
below 2 mmol/L with one or more high-intensity or anaerobic
training zones above 4 mmol/L, and lactate threshold training can be
seen as attaining and maintaining steady state lactate levels in the
1531
