Equipment
A force plate set up on a stable surface
A suitable computer, tablet, or cell phone connected to force plate hardware and with the
corresponding software installed
Permissible alternatives: a smooth wall with a ceiling higher than the highest jumper’s jump
height plus chalk of a different color than the wall or a commercial device for vertical jump
testing (e.g., Vertec)
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure (Using a Force Plate)
1. Before testing, the tester should calibrate and set up the force plate as per the manufacturer’s
instructions.
2. The force plate should always be set up on a stable surface (ideally in the same location each
time) and the force zeroed with nothing on the plates immediately before the athlete tests.
Without a preparatory or stutter step, the athlete performs a countermovement by quickly
flexing the knees and hips, moving the trunk forward and downward, and swinging the arms
backward.
3. The countermovement jump is most commonly conducted with hands in a fixed position on the
hips throughout the takeoff portion of the jump to isolate the power and coordination capacity
of the lower limbs. Jumping with the use of an arm swing can also be tested and is referred to
as an Abalakov jump. Either way, consistency should be used and each jump should be tracked
as to whether it was performed with (Abalakov) or without an arm swing.
4. Figure 14.7 shows an example of how the vertical ground reaction forces change across the
five phases of a vertical jump with a countermovement when measured with a force plate
testing system.
Procedure (Using a Wall and Chalk)
1. The tester rubs chalk on the fingertips of the athlete’s dominant hand.
2. The athlete stands with the dominant shoulder about 6 inches (15 cm) from the wall and, with
both feet flat on the floor, reaches as high as possible with the dominant hand and makes a
chalk mark on the wall.
3. The athlete then lowers the dominant hand and, without a preparatory or stutter step,
performs a countermovement by quickly flexing the knees and hips, moving the trunk forward
and downward, and swinging the arms backward. During the jump, the dominant arm reaches
upward while the nondominant arm moves downward relative to the body.
4. At the highest point in the jump, the athlete places a second chalk mark on the wall with the
fingers of the dominant hand, using a swiping motion of the fingers. The score is the vertical
distance between the two chalk marks.
5. The best of three trials is recorded to the nearest 0.5 inch or 1.0 centimeter.
Procedure (Using a Commercial Vertec Device)
1. The tester adjusts the height of the stack of movable color-coded horizontal plastic vanes to be
within the athlete’s standing reach height. The highest vane that can be reached and pushed
forward with the dominant hand while the athlete stands flat-footed determines the standing
touch height.
2. The vane stack is then raised by a measured distance (marked on the shaft holding the vanes)
so that the athlete will not jump higher or lower than the set of vanes. This requires a rough
786
