Practice Schedule
Practice is essential for motor skill learning. More importantly,
challenging practice enables motor skill acquisition; mere repetitions
alone are not enough to change behavior (43). One of the many
ways to facilitate skill learning is through the manipulation of the
practice structure and schedule.
Whole Versus Part Practice
With respect to teaching a complex motor skill, there is debate about
the effectiveness of whole versus part practice. Whole practice
addresses the skill in its entirety, whereas part practice separates
the skill into a series of subcomponents. As a general rule, tasks that
are challenging but have low interrelatedness of the subcomponents
are learned better with part practice (40). For example, the snatch is
a skilled power movement that can be broken down into four
subcomponents: the first pull, transition, second pull, and catch. On
the other hand, whole practice would tend to be favored for a task
with subcomponents that are highly interrelated, because part
practice can inhibit the effective regrouping of the subcomponents
(40). In the instance of a lunge, it would be ineffective to separate
the movements of the front leg from the movements of the lead leg,
because these two components are highly interrelated. Therefore, a
lunge would be better learned as a whole. Regardless of the task
interrelatedness, in instances in which the skill may be dangerous or
costly to learn as a whole, part practice is the favored choice.
Internal and External Cues for Coaching
Feedback
The best coaching cues use the fewest words but make the greatest impact.
Sometimes gestures or single words can be effective. It is important to stay brief
with either motivation or instruction-related feedback during training sessions. If
not, coaches tend to overcoach, a process known as verbal overshadowing, which
can disrupt fluid motions by introducing cognitive processing. Athletes with limited
experience may need time to experiment and learn to move and self-correct during
524
