actual 1RM (directly tested),
estimated 1RM from an xRM test (e.g., a 10RM), or
xRM based on the number of repetitions planned for that exercise (the
“goal” repetitions; e.g., 5 repetitions per set).
Once the actual 1RM is measured or estimated, the athlete’s training load is
calculated as a percentage of the 1RM. Alternatively, a xRM test may be
performed based on goal repetitions, thereby eliminating computations or
estimations. In many cases, the strength and conditioning professional will use a
variety of testing options depending on the exercises selected and the athlete’s
training background. A common strategy for testing sufficiently conditioned
athletes is to conduct a 1RM test in several core exercises and use xRM testing
for assistance exercises.
Testing the 1RM
To assign training loads based on a percentage of the 1RM, the strength and
conditioning professional must first determine the athlete’s 1RM. This method of
assessment is typically reserved for resistance-trained athletes who are classified
as intermediate or advanced and have exercise technique experience in the
exercises being tested; however, 1RM testing can be safely performed with
youth (19), adolescents (49), inexperienced adults (24), and older adults (127).
Individuals who are untrained, inexperienced, injured, or medically supervised
may not be appropriate participants for 1RM testing. One-repetition maximum
testing requires an adequate training status and lifting experience, because the
assessment of maximal strength places significant stress on the involved
muscles, connective tissues, and joints, although this has been shown to be
appropriate and reliable in youth and collegiate athletes with approximately 6
months’ experience in the power clean and back squat (24, 49). However, it may
be more appropriate to complete a 3RM test instead of a maximal 1RM test
because ignoring an athlete’s training status and exercise technique experience
diminishes the safety and accuracy of 1RM test results.
When selecting exercises for 1RM testing, the strength and conditioning
professional should choose core exercises, because the large muscle groups and
multiple joints are better able to handle the heavy loads. Despite this guideline,
an exercise should not be selected for 1RM testing if it cannot provide valid and
reliable data (i.e., does not accurately and consistently assess maximal muscular
strength). For instance, the large upper back musculature and multiple joints
involved in the bent-over row exercise can probably tolerate the loads for a 1RM
test, but maintaining a correct body position throughout testing would be
extremely difficult. The weaker stabilizing muscles of the lower back might
1226
