performing lower body plyometrics, it is essential that the knees are
positioned over the toes. Inward movement of the knees—also
termed dynamic valgus—is a significant risk factor for knee
injuries of all types, including patellofemoral pain and tears or
ruptures of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) (45).
In addition to instructing an athlete on a proper body position
while landing, the strength and conditioning professional must
explain, coach, and cue the athlete to land with an active flat foot.
In preparation for ground contact, the athlete’s ankles should be
dorsiflexed (so that the toes are pulled back toward the knees). This
means that the bottom of the foot is parallel to the ground as the
athlete comes into landing. Immediately before landing, the athlete
should be taught to aggressively plantarflex the ankle to “attack the
ground with the foot.” This achieves two outcomes. First, the
plantarflexion increases the tension in the gastrocnemius–soleus
complex at ground contact, which increases the efficacy of the SSC
and enhances the output power in the resulting jump. Second, the
last-second adjustment in the angle of the foot, along with the
increased muscle tension, means that the heels stay off the ground
during the land–takeoff action. This enhances both anterior and
vertical propulsion and is often coached as “the credit card rule,”
meaning that enough of the foot should be in contact with the
ground to achieve high impulses, but the strength and conditioning
professional should be able to slide a credit card under the athlete’s
heels (12a).
Strength
Consideration of the athlete’s level of strength is necessary before he
or she performs plyometrics. Strength is essential for the
maintenance of posture through the plyometric action and the ability
to manage and appropriately direct ground reaction forces through
effective ground contact to optimize performance benefits and
reduce potential for injury (figure 19.4). Without these outcomes,
safe and effective techniques cannot be maintained as the intensity
1291
