Free weight ground-based exercises offer the ideal
combination of specificity and instability, especially
when 
one 
is 
focusing 
on 
strength 
and 
power
development.
Instability Devices
Instability-based exercises are typically considered those that are
performed on unstable surfaces or devices commonly found in
strength and conditioning facilities. The increased popularity of
training on instability devices seems to have stemmed from their use
by physiotherapists in the rehabilitation process. These devices are
used to promote postural disequilibrium or imbalance requiring a
greater stabilizing function of the core musculature (14, 151). If
perturbations are applied during use of these devices, a balance
challenge can occur that requires activation of the core musculature
in order to induce postural adjustments to remain upright (27).
Numerous instability devices are available to the strength and
conditioning professional; the most common are the Swiss, physio,
and Pezzi gymnastics balls (14). Other instability options include
hemispherical physioballs with one inflated dome side and a flat
rubber side, inflatable disks, wobble boards, balance boards, foam
tubes, and various foam platforms. Natural surfaces such as sand
can also create scenarios that introduce instability into an athlete’s
movement pattern, creating an increased balance challenge that
results in increased core muscle activation. Many strength and
conditioning 
professionals 
believe 
that 
performing 
instability
exercises 
trains 
the 
target 
agonist 
muscle 
group 
while
simultaneously increasing core muscle activation (14). While some
evidence suggests that core muscle activation may be increased, it
appears that this increase occurs in conjunction with reduced force
generation by the agonist muscle (13, 33). In fact, as the degree of
instability of the exercise increases, there is a concomitant reduction
in force-generating capacity (76). During training with instability
exercises, the overall agonist force-generating capacity (12) and
1099
