Fitness–Fatigue Paradigm
Generally, a summation of the two primary training aftereffects (i.e., fitness and
fatigue) occurs in response to training interventions that influence the athlete’s
level of preparedness (15, 38, 107). In 1995, Zatsiorsky (106) presented the
classic explanation of these relationships as the two-factor model, more
commonly referred to as the fitness–fatigue paradigm (figure 22.4). Ultimately,
every training bout, session, or cycle creates both fatigue and fitness aftereffects,
which summate to create a state of preparedness (15, 106). When training loads
are the highest, fitness becomes elevated, but because of the high training loads,
a concomitant increase in fatigue occurs. When fitness and fatigue are summed in
this case, the level of fatigue results in a reduction in preparedness. On the other
hand, when training workloads are low, little fatigue occurs and minimal fitness is
developed, resulting in a low level of preparedness. Thus, the sequencing of
training loads becomes important in that it allows for training workloads to be
varied in a systematic manner. An important thing to remember is that fatigue
dissipates at a rate two-thirds faster than fitness, thus allowing preparedness to
become elevated if appropriate training strategies are used to retain fitness while
reducing fatigue (35, 38, 41). While the fitness–fatigue paradigm is classically
represented as one fatigue, fitness, and preparedness curve, it is likely that each
training factor stimulates its own individual fitness, fatigue, and preparedness
aftereffect response (15, 38, 41). These aftereffects are often considered to be
residual training effects and serve as a fundamental concept underlying the use of
sequential periodization models (35, 41). Ultimately, the residual training effects
of one training period have the potential to affect the level of preparedness in
subsequent training periods, depending on the overall structure of the periodized
training plan (35, 41).
1585
