amounts of food 1 to 2 hours before they start, transitioning to easily digestible
carbohydrates and liquid carbohydrates before competition, while also ensuring
that they consume an adequate amount of carbohydrate during competition.
The following are general recommendations that can be adapted to meet each
athlete’s individual needs. More research needs to be done to examine the needs
of athletes in a variety of sports and to determine the effects of varying amounts
of each macronutrient on performance (100). Until this is done, the guidelines
for aerobic endurance athletes are adapted to other sports. This information
should also be applied to strength, power, and team or field sport athletes.
Preexercise feeding may be more important than postexercise feeding if an
athlete is underfueled. Female athletes may see greater benefits from their
training when nutrients are consumed before exercise compared to after
exercise on strength and lean mass adaptations (111).
Athletes should prehydrate, if necessary, several hours before exercise to
allow for fluid absorption and urine output. Their urine specific gravity
(USG) reading should be <1.02 (120).
Athletes who tend to get nauseated easily, who have experienced diarrhea
during competition, who get anxious or experience precompetition jitters,
or who compete in high-intensity sports (jarring movements can increase
the likelihood of stomach upset), as well as those who are competing in
the heat, may want to consider eating at least 4 hours before competition,
as well as trying a variety of types of low-fiber carbohydrate options.
Aerobic endurance athletes who eat at least 4 hours before competition
should include approximately 1 to 4 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram
body weight and 0.15 to 0.25 grams of protein per kilogram body weight
(131).
If the precompetition meal is consumed 2 hours before exercise, athletes
should aim for approximately 1 gram of carbohydrate per kilogram body
weight. Athletes should follow an individualized hydration plan. During
prolonged activity in hot weather, they should consume a sport drink
containing 20 to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the
anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter, and
carbohydrate in a concentration of 5% to 10% (120).
When consumed closer to the start of competition, the preexercise meal
should be smaller. Additionally, liquid sources of carbohydrate may be
preferable when the preexercise meal is 1 hour before the event because
they are emptied from the stomach faster than solid food (7). Gels,
gummies, and similar sources of carbohydrate are also digested very
quickly. Table 11.1 summarizes these recommendations while providing
sample food options.
618
