Flexibility
Flexibility is defined as the range of motion (ROM) that occurs
about a joint. Flexibility can be expressed statically and dynamically.
Static flexibility refers to the range of possible movement about a
joint (28) and its surrounding muscles during a passive movement
(40). Static flexibility requires no voluntary muscular activity; an
external force such as gravity, a partner, or a machine provides the
force for a stretch. Dynamic flexibility, on the other hand, refers
to the available ROM during active movements and therefore
requires voluntary muscular actions. Dynamic ROM is generally
greater than static ROM. However, the relationship between static
and dynamic ROM has historically been questioned and still remains
largely unresolved, especially in relation to the fact that a normal
range of motion cannot guarantee normal movement (19), indicating
that ROM alone cannot determine the quality of any movement.
Therefore, the direct transfer between measures of static flexibility
and sport performance cannot be determined.
In determining the role flexibility can play in performance, it is
important to look at the nature of the sport or activity being
undertaken. Given that performance in the majority of sports is
dynamic in nature, it is advised to look beyond the role of flexibility
as a static quality and instead consider its contribution as a dynamic
quality (66). Here, the concept of mobility introduced earlier can be
a more enlightening term than flexibility, naturally reflecting this
dynamic quality. Effective mobility requires the integration of aspects
such as balance coordination, postural control coordination, and
perception (19). In this way, mobility automatically frames flexibility
as a dynamic quality, with the athlete required to demonstrate
control, coordination, and force through any demonstrated ROM,
essentially 
being 
analogous 
to 
dynamic 
flexibility. 
This 
is
advantageous 
when 
considering 
the 
role 
of 
flexibility 
on
performance. Indeed, enhanced ROM without appropriate motor
control will not maximize performance (80).
873
