The key to the success of aerobic exercise in stimulating new
bone formation is that the activity must be significantly more intense
than the daily activities the person normally engages in so as to
exceed the minimum threshold intensity, as well as at a cyclical
strain to exceed the minimum and strain frequency for bone growth
(12). The intensity of the activity must systematically increase in
order to continually overload the bone. Eventually, it may become
difficult to overload bone through aerobic exercise when the oxygen
transport system rather than limitations of the musculoskeletal
system restricts the progression to new exercise intensity. Bone
responds to the magnitude and rate of external loading. Therefore,
to enhance the stimulus to the musculoskeletal system, it is also
necessary to increase the rate of limb movement. Using high-
intensity interval training techniques is one method of providing a
greater osteogenic stimulus while still providing the benefits
associated with aerobic exercise (14, 39). Another method to
increase the musculoskeletal system stimulus is to combine aerobic
endurance training with resistance training, a known stimulus for
improving bone mass (107), in what is commonly referred to as
concurrent training (146) (refer to chapter 21 for more
information).
In mature adults, the extent to which tendons, ligaments, and
cartilage grow and become stronger is proportional to the intensity
of the exercise stimulus, especially from weight-bearing activities
(119). Tendons and ligaments consist of bundles of collagen-
containing fibers that increase in number, size, and density following
consistent exercise stimulation (44). As with bone and muscle,
exercise intensity that consistently exceeds the strain placed on the
connective tissues during normal daily activities is needed to create
connective tissue changes. An example of the positive effects of
weight-bearing activity on cartilage is evidenced in a typical knee
joint, where the surfaces of the joint that experience the greatest
degree of weight bearing are thicker than the non-weight-bearing
surfaces (119). Complete movement through a full range of motion
350
