collagenous structures (e.g., fascicular membranes), which provide
stability and protection to musculature. This reflexive response
potentiates, or increases, the activity in the agonist muscle, thereby
increasing the force the muscle produces (9-12, 41). As in the
mechanical model, if a concentric muscle action does not
immediately follow a stretch (i.e., if there is too long a time between
stretch and concentric action or movement over too large a range),
the potentiating ability of the stretch reflex is negated.
Enhancements in measurement techniques using force platforms
(kinetic 
data), 
motion 
capture 
(kinematic 
data), 
and
electromyography (motor unit activation) have demonstrated that
the mechanical and neurophysiological models contribute to the
increased production of force seen during plyometric exercise (3, 9-
12, 16, 35, 41). For example, Jarvis and colleagues (37) have
reported that rebound activities elicit enhanced neurophysiological
contributions when compared to ballistic activities and that increased
mechanical outputs exhibited during high-impact plyometrics are
largely the result of mechanical factors associated with potential
energy production (i.e., mechanical contributions).
Stretch-Shortening Cycle
The stretch-shortening cycle (SSC) employs the energy storage
capabilities of the SEC and stimulation of the stretch reflex to
facilitate a maximal increase in muscle recruitment over a minimal
amount of time. The SSC involves three distinct phases as shown in
table 19.1. While the table delineates the SSC’s individual mechanical
and neurophysiological events during each phase, it is important to
remember that all the events listed do not necessarily occur within
the given phase. That is, some of the events may last longer or may
require less time than allowed in the given phase. Phase I is the
eccentric phase, which is the time from resting position to the
bottom of the countermovement that involves preloading the agonist
muscle group or groups. During this phase, the SEC stores elastic
energy, and the muscle spindles are stimulated. As the muscle
1264
