intensity and volume of training are adequate (48, 63, 135, 138,
197). Children as young as age five have benefited from
developmentally appropriate resistance training (3, 121), and a
variety of training modalities have proven to be effective (139).
While gains in a maximum strength range of approximately 10% to
90% have been reported in the literature (15), strength gains of
roughly 30% to 40% are typically observed in untrained
preadolescent children following short-term (8-20 weeks) resistance
training programs (56, 139). However, following the initial adaptation
period, the rate of change in strength gains will be attenuated as
youth adapt to the training program, thus highlighting the need for
continued, progressive training. Meta-analytical data have shown
that resistance training interventions realize larger gains in muscle
strength and power when programs exceed 23 weeks in duration
(134). Longer-term training programs afford more opportunities for
children to learn and develop skills but also enable children to be
exposed to higher intensities of training in a safe and progressive
manner. Lesinksi and colleagues (134) also indicated that strength
gains were greater when young athletes were exposed to higher
relative intensities (>80% 1RM). Similar notions apply to other
fitness components, with data showing larger gains in jump height in
response to moderate- to high-intensity resistance training (212) and
greater gains in peak oxygen uptake (V̇ O2peak) when endurance
training is prescribed at ≥85% HRmax (5). Clearly, training intensity
is a critical prescription variable for strength and conditioning
coaches to manipulate; however, in accordance with the principle of
progressive overload, any increases in intensity should be applied in
a progressive and gradual manner, with periodized fluctuations in
volumes and intensities over time (59).
It is crucial that practitioners ensure that training
intensity is never increased at the expense of technical
competency or a child’s psychosocial maturity. Programs
should always remain designed in accordance with the
401
