Variable-Resistance Training Methods
Resistance training practices include three methods for applying
overload to the body: constant external, accommodating, and
variable resistance (41, 88). The most common method for
applying resistance during training is to use a constant external load,
which is best represented by traditional resistance training methods
(e.g., free weights). In this scenario, the external load remains
constant throughout the range of motion, better represents real-life
activities, and allows for a more realistic skeletal muscle coordination
and movement pattern (54, 88, 106). On the other hand,
accommodating resistance (sometimes referred to as semi-isokinetic
resistance applications) generally allows for the speed of movement
or isokinetic resistance to be controlled throughout a range of
motion (88, 128). Stone and colleagues (128) suggest that these
types of devices have poor external validity. Additionally, these
devices are unlikely to provide an adequate training stimulus when
compared to more traditional methods such as those involving
constant-loaded free weight movements, particularly when those
movements are performed with multijoint movement patterns.
With traditional resistance training exercise, the external load
remains constant, but the forces exerted by the muscle vary in
accordance with the mechanical advantages associated with the
joints involved in the movement (17, 41, 130). In order to combat
the changing mechanical advantages and inertial properties
associated with constant-loaded resistance, a concerted effort has
been made to develop innovative training devices that allow the
applied resistance to be varied in conjunction with changes in joint
angle (41, 145). These variable-resistance methods attempt to alter
the resistance, so the muscle maximizes force application throughout
the full range of motion (130, 145). For example, in the back squat
the greatest muscle force production occurs at the midpoint of the
movement, while the smallest forces are produced at the bottom.
Thus variable-resistance methods would be used to reduce
1102
