•  Aerobic power (maximal oxygen uptake). Arguably the most significant
change in physiological variables with aerobic exercise training is an increase in
maximal oxygen uptake (V̇ O2max), the criterion index of cardiovascular fitness.
The V̇ O2max is determined in part by genetics and by the training program
undertaken by the athlete. Elite athletes may show minor changes in V̇ O2max with
training (5%-10%), while untrained individuals may increase V̇ O2max by as much
as 20% (67, 75). A high V̇ O2max coupled with increased lactate threshold allows
enhanced performance for running sports as well as sports requiring intermittent
sprinting (soccer, basketball, and other team sports).
•  Lactate threshold. Aerobic training increases the absolute lactate threshold,
allowing the highly trained individual to work at both a higher relative and absolute
percentage of his or her V̇ O2max than a less-trained individual. This increased
tolerance of lactate translates into a variety of performance outcomes; these
include running at a higher percentage of V̇ O2max for a race (resulting in reduced
time), covering more distance during a game, enhanced recovery for second-half
performance, and working at higher exercise intensities throughout an event. The
importance of having a high lactate threshold can be seen in the following
example. Two individuals can have the same V̇ O2max, perhaps 50 mL · kg−1 ·
min−1; however, if one has a lactate threshold of 80% of V̇ O2max (i.e., threshold
occurs at 40 mL · kg−1 · min−1) whereas the other’s occurs at 70% (i.e., 35 mL ·
kg−1 · min−1), the first individual will be able to maintain a power output
equivalent to 5 mL · kg−1· min−1 higher than the second individual. All other things
being equal, such as exercise economy, this would result in a greater speed of
movement and thus superior performance.
•  Effective use of substrate. Carbohydrates are the preferred source of fuel
for high-intensity intermittent exercise in many team sports. Aerobic exercise
training results in a greater use of fat as a substrate for exercise with a relative
sparing of carbohydrate. With a sparing of carbohydrate (i.e., reduced glycogen
depletion), an aerobic endurance-trained individual can maintain higher-intensity
exercise for longer periods of time. Aerobic exercise may be further improved
through various carbohydrate-loading manipulations to increase endogenous
glycogen stores (19).
•  Muscle fiber adaptations. When muscle fibers are examined cross-
sectionally, elite distance runners have a higher proportion (percentage) of type I
fibers, and the available type I fibers are functionally very efficient for aerobic
metabolism (increased mitochondrial density and oxidative enzyme capacity [69]
and capillary network for oxygen delivery). Aerobic exercise training, especially
long-distance and high-intensity intermittent exercise, results in an increase in the
oxidative capacity of type I fibers. Research indicates that after a period of aerobic
endurance training such as marathon training, there is a shift toward type I fibers
associated with the higher volume of aerobic endurance training. The oxidative
phenotype type I/IIa fibers also increase, while type IIa and IIa/x decrease in both
vastus lateralis and soleus. However, it should be considered that certain muscles
356
