Example of an Annual Training Plan
A sample approach to designing a full annual training plan (i.e., macrocycle for
sports with one competitive season) spanning all four sport seasons is presented
in figure 22.8.
The annual plan example provided in this chapter defines a macrocycle that
lasts from May 1 until April 28. This macrocycle is subdivided into four seasons:
off-season (May 1-August 20), preseason (August 21-November 5), in-season
(November 6-April 14), and postseason (begins on April 15). Since there is only
one competitive season in this annual training plan a single macrocycle structure
has been used. This macrocycle is then subdivided into 14 mesocycles, which
range in length between two and four weeks. Note: The primary focus of this
sample annual training plan is to explain how to subdivide the annual plan and to
design the resistance training component. Although other modes of training are
described briefly (e.g., plyometrics, anaerobic conditioning, aerobic endurance)
and can be easily incorporated into the annual plan, this example is not intended
to illustrate every aspect of a strength and conditioning program for basketball.
For more information on how to structure an annual training plan, consult NSCA’s
Guide to Program Design (41).
Off-Season
Following the postseason active rest period, the athlete should be rested and
ready to begin off-season (preparatory period) training. For this example, this
preparatory period lasts about 16 weeks, from May 1 until August 20. The goal of
this period is to establish a base level of conditioning to increase the athlete’s
tolerance for more intense training in later phases and periods. In this example,
mesocycle 1 is used to expose the athlete to initial strength and conditioning
activities at low intensities and volumes to reintroduce them to training. Across
the first two microcycles training intensity increases in preparation for
performance testing that is planned for microcycle 3. During these first three
weeks training loads are applied based on the athlete’s rating of perceived
exertion or based on of the repetition-in-reserve scale presented in chapter 18.
During microcycle 3 the training loads for all non-tested activities will be reduced
so that the athletes can partake in a series of initial pretesting to establish the
initial training loads for the exercises in the second mesocycle. In later
mesocycles, when more or other exercises are added, the training loads can be
estimated from loads used in similar exercises or can be determined from RM
testing. For example, the strength and conditioning professional can reasonably
predict training load for the hang clean from the tested power clean maximum, or
the actual RM load could be measured. Other monitoring tests related to
1606
