equipment and how equipment can cause injury. Always
inspect newly purchased equipment before use. If new
equipment 
arrives 
damaged, 
immediately 
notify 
the
manufacturer or seller and have it replaced. If currently owned
equipment becomes damaged, remove it for repair or
replacement. If equipment is too large to remove or no
storage space exists, affix a sign to the equipment stating that
it should not be used.
Do not allow unsupervised athletes to use equipment.
Constant supervision of the athletes by the strength and
conditioning professional ensures that equipment is used for
its intended purpose and with proper technique (30).
Discipline
To ensure that athletes adhere to the facility rules, the strength and
conditioning director may want to require them to sign and date a
copy of the facility rules and guidelines to acknowledge that they
understand and will adhere to all rules before facility use. This
process will reduce the possibility of claims that they did not know
the repercussions of aberrant behavior. The facility rules need to be
enforced, with possible disciplinary actions posted, documented, and
levied in proportion to the offense. The use of exercise and
conditioning activities as punishment is strictly prohibited due to the
negative, legal consequences that will result from reckless or
negligent conduct (e.g., hazing and mental abuse). According to The
Inter-Association Task Force for Preventing Sudden Death in
Collegiate Conditioning Sessions best practice recommendations, “no
additional physical burden that would increase the physical risk of
injury or sudden death should be placed on the athlete under any
circumstance” (6, p. 478). Following is an example of a tiered
penalty system applied to a repeated violation (7). (Note that this
type of policy must be established with full support and involvement
of the athletic director and all sport coaches. Typically, the strength
and conditioning staff does not have to pursue disciplinary actions
1801
