Eating until feeling uncomfortably full
Eating large amounts of food when not feeling physically hungry
Eating alone because of feeling embarrassed by how much one is eating
Feeling disgusted with oneself, depressed, or very guilty afterward (55)
Because binge-eating episodes are not followed by purging, as is the case
with bulimia nervosa, people with binge-eating disorder are often overweight or
obese. The lifetime prevalence for males ages 10 to 39 years is estimated to be
0.69% to 1.93% and 1.08% to 3.14% in females of the same age, with peak
onset in the early to mid-20s (143). A lifetime prevalence of binge-eating
disorder is associated with morbid obesity (BMI >40). Over the course of a
lifetime, it is estimated that approximately 30% of males and 29.7% of females
with binge-eating disorder receive treatment (143). Binge eating is associated
with significant physical and psychological problems. Additionally, people with
binge-eating disorder may feel embarrassed, guilty, or disgusted with their
behavior and may attempt to hide their behavior by eating alone (55).
Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is characterized by recurrent consumption of food in amounts
significantly greater than would customarily be consumed in a discrete period of
time—for example, an entire pizza and a half-gallon of ice cream, plus a package
of cookies. Purging follows episodes of binge eating and may include one or
more of the following: self-induced vomiting, intense exercise, laxative use, or
diuretic use. The bingeing and purging occur at least once a week for a period of
three months (55). People with bulimia nervosa feel a lack of control over their
eating during binge episodes and are more likely to be normal weight as
opposed to underweight, are unhappy with their weight and body, and fear
weight gain. Average age of onset for bulimia nervosa is in the early 20s, and
the lifetime prevalence is 0.08% to 0.30% in males ages 10 to 39 and 0.56% to
1.7% in females of the same age range. Approximately 15.7% of males and
17.7% of females are estimated to receive treatment (143). For more
information about bulimia, the reader is encouraged to refer to DSM-V (84).
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID) is an eating or feeding
disturbance, including apparent lack of interest in eating or food; avoidance
based on the sensory characteristics of food; or concern about aversive
consequences of eating. This disorder is manifested by persistent failure to meet
appropriate nutritional or energy needs associated with one (or more) of the
following (55):
654
