through injectable administration (24). Thus, chemical modification
of testosterone was necessary to slow the degradation process in
order to achieve androgenic and anabolic effects at lower
concentrations and to provide effective blood concentrations for
longer periods of time (24). Many derivatives of testosterone were
developed from 1940 to 1960 (186); once these modifications
occurred, anabolic steroid use through either oral or injectable
administration became possible. In recent years, anabolic steroid
administration via creams and gels for topical applications and skin
patches has increased in popularity, primarily for medical reasons.
However, the most commonly used forms for administration in
athletes are oral and injectable forms (115). Examples of oral and
injectable anabolic steroids are listed in table 12.1.
Dosing
Athletes typically use anabolic steroids in a stacking regimen, in
which they administer several different drugs simultaneously (167).
The rationale for stacking is to increase the potency of each drug via
an additive effect. That is, the potency of one anabolic agent may be
enhanced when it is consumed simultaneously with another anabolic
agent. Research in this area is limited, and the efficacy of stacking
has not been proven one way or the other. Individuals use both oral
and injectable compounds. Most users take anabolic steroids in a
cyclic pattern, meaning they use the drugs for several weeks or
months and alternate these cycles with periods of discontinued use
(167). Often users administer the drugs in a pyramid (step-up)
pattern in which dosages are steadily increased over several weeks
(115). Toward the end of the cycle, the athlete “steps down” to
reduce the likelihood of negative side effects. At this point, some
athletes discontinue the drug use or perhaps initiate another cycle of
different drugs (e.g., drugs that may increase endogenous
testosterone production, taken to prevent the undesirable drop in
testosterone concentrations that follows the removal of the
pharmaceutical agents). One study showed that the typical steroid
670
