Interval Training
Interval training is a method that emphasizes bioenergetic
adaptations for a more efficient energy transfer within the metabolic
pathways by using predetermined intervals of exercise and rest
periods (i.e., work-to-rest ratios). Theoretically, properly spaced
work-to-rest intervals allow more work to be completed at higher
exercise intensities with the same or less fatigue than during
continuous training at the same relative intensity. An early paper by
Christensen and colleagues (31) compared the total running
distance, average oxygen uptake, and blood lactate concentration
during continuous running for 5 minutes and interval running
totaling 30 minutes with 2:1, 1:1, and 1:2 work-to-rest ratios.
Subjects were assigned a continuous running intensity (speed) that
would result in fatigue within 5 minutes. At that fast pace during the
continuous run, the subjects were able to complete 0.81 miles (1.3
km) before exhaustion. However, by using 2:1, 1:1, and 1:2 work-to-
rest ratios and the same running intensity for a total duration of 30
minutes, the subjects were able to complete 4.14 miles (6.66 km),
3.11 miles (5 km), and 2.07 miles (3.33 km), respectively, all while
working aerobic capacity in a manner similar to that in the
continuous running condition. Therefore, much more distance can be
accomplished at higher intensities with interval training; this concept
has been established for over 45 years (31).
A series of short-term (two-week) interval training studies used
six sessions of four to seven 30-second maximum cycling efforts
interspaced with 4 minutes of recovery (1:8 work-to-rest ratio).
These studies demonstrated improvements in muscle oxidative
potential (26, 63), muscle buffering capacity (26, 63), muscle
glycogen content (25, 26), and time-trial performance (25), as well
as a doubled aerobic endurance capacity (26). In addition, a similar
four-week interval training program exhibited increases in muscle
activation and total work output (38) in trained cyclists. This
highlights the concept that the modality of exercise does not seem
216
