accomplishment of the related long-term goal. The athlete may see
more relevance in everyday practice goals if it is apparent how they
help attain the ultimate level of performance. For example, a
gymnast who has a long-term goal of winning the floor routine for
the national championship during her senior year may be much more
intense and positive about weight room conditioning exercises when
she perceives their relevance to her dream. An athlete may be more
aroused psychologically and physiologically during practice by the
perception that today’s activity is another step on the ladder to a
personal, long-term dream.
Finally, the specificity of the goals—whether short- or long-term—
is important in relation to giving the athlete feedback in effective
coaching. Feedback, or the knowledge of success and failure, is
more effective in the presence of specific, quantifiable goals, as
opposed to vague standards of performance. Feedback is a
corrective mechanism, like a thermostat or cybernetic device. Both
success and failure can help the athlete stay on course toward long-
term success. For example, a specific goal of 25 minutes of
continuous running in a heart rate range of 160 to 170 beats/min is
a much more engaging objective than “going out for a run.” The
vague phrasing may be fine for a recreational participant, but it is
not helpful for a competitive cross-country runner, especially when
the goal is to develop physiological capacity.
Optimal goal setting requires knowledge of the exercise sciences
in both the biophysical and behavioral domains. The efficacy of goals
for improving athletic performance lies in their relevance to the
physical needs of the athlete. For example, formulating a series of
appropriate goals to enable a 400-meter runner to decrease his or
her time in the event rests on understanding the physical profile,
relevant metabolic pathways, and biomechanical technique to be
developed.
Of course, some goals may be completely psychological and
therefore only indirectly performance based. An example of such a
goal is to adopt a positive mood state for an entire practice.
502
