Although %1RM–repetition tables provide helpful guidelines for assigning an
athlete’s training loads, research to date does not support the widespread use of
such tables for establishing training loads for every exercise assigned to athletes,
for the following reasons:
Table 18.8 assumes there is a linear association between the loads lifted
and the repetitions performed; however, several studies have reported a
curvilinear relationship (95, 99, 103).
Resistance-trained athletes may be able to exceed the number of
repetitions listed in the table at any given percentage of their 1RM,
especially in lower body core exercises (74, 75, 120, 134).
The number of repetitions that can be performed at a certain percentage
of the 1RM is based on a single set. When an athlete performs multiple
sets, the loads may need to be reduced so that the desired number of
repetitions can be completed in all the sets. Despite the prevalence of 1RM
research, athletes may not always perform the predicted number of
repetitions at a specified percentage of a 1RM. For instance, researchers
have shown that subjects were able to perform two or three times more
repetitions than are listed in table 18.8 (74, 75, 134).
A certain percentage of the 1RM assigned to a machine exercise can result
in more repetitions at the same percentage of the 1RM than with a similar
free weight exercise (74, 75).
Exercises involving smaller muscle areas may not produce as many
repetitions as seen in table 18.8, and exercises recruiting large muscle
areas are likely to result in more repetitions performed (183).
Empirical evidence further suggests that as the percentage of the 1RM
decreases, the variability in the number of repetitions that can be
completed increases. For example, the most accurate relationship between
percentages of the 1RM and the maximum repetitions possible is for loads
greater than 75% of the 1RM and fewer than 10 repetitions (133) with
greater accuracy coming with even lower repetitions (45).
Therefore, loads calculated from the %1RM in table 18.8 should be used only
as a guideline for estimating a particular RM load for a resistance training
exercise. Even with the inherent weaknesses just explained, it appears that it is
still more accurate to assign loads based on a percentage of a test-established
1RM than it is to estimate a 1RM from a submaximal load (74, 75).
1RM and xRM Testing Options
To gather information needed to assign a training load, the strength and
conditioning professional has the option of determining the athlete’s
1225
