The thermic effect of food, also known as diet-induced thermogenesis, is
the increase in energy expenditure above the RMR that can be measured for
several hours following a meal. The thermic effect of food includes the energy
cost of digestion, absorption, metabolism, and storage of food in the body. The
thermic effect of food accounts for approximately 10% to 15% of total calories
burned each day (63, 114).
Many different equations can be used to calculate calorie needs, including the
Cunningham equation and equations by the Institute of Medicine (IOM), which
are prediction equations. The various IOM equations take sex, body weight,
height, age, and physical activity levels into account to predict the estimated
energy requirement (EER) (138). RMR can then be multiplied by an activity
factor from 1.2 (sedentary) to 1.9 (heavy physical activity) to predict energy
requirements (50). However, these equations do not take into account how
muscle mass affects RMR (90). The Cunningham equation takes fat-free mass
(FFM) into account to estimate RMR, making it more applicable to athletes (135).
RMR = 500 + 22 (FFM in kg)
After using the Cunningham equation to estimate RMR based on FFM, an activity
factor can be used to estimate total daily energy expenditure. Instead of using a
basic activity factor, the strength and conditioning professional may choose to
use metabolic equivalents (MET values), an estimate of caloric expenditure
during activity. One MET is the energy equivalent of sitting quietly; therefore, the
greater the intensity of exercise, the higher the MET value (5).
Another, more laborious method that can be used by very motivated athletes
is to record dietary intake for a minimum of three consecutive, representative
days during a period of stable body weight. The individual’s daily energy
requirement is assumed to equal the average number of calories consumed each
day. The pitfall of this method is that recording food intake usually alters normal
eating habits and people do not always accurately record their food intake (55,
121). Finally, a very simple method for quickly assessing calorie needs is
presented in table 11.4 (24).
Weight Gain
An athlete’s ability to gain weight depends on numerous factors; the ones that
can be controlled include diet and training. The off-season should be used as a
time to make dietary changes that focus on weight gain since athletes do not
have the pressures of competition on their mind.
If athletes increase their calorie intake dramatically and consistently, they
could gain more fat than they would like. A general guideline, which should be
adjusted based on the athlete, is to consume approximately 500 additional
calories per day in order to gain weight (113). Eating larger portion sizes,
643
