efficient, however, so dietary amino acid intake is required to replace
losses.
The RDA for protein for men and women 19 years of age and
older, based on nitrogen balance studies, is 0.8 grams of high-quality
protein per kilogram body weight per day (164). Children, teens, and
pregnant and lactating women have higher dietary protein needs as
reflected in the RDA for these groups. However, protein needs are
inversely proportional to calorie intake because small amounts of
protein can be metabolized as a source of energy when a person is
in a state of negative calorie balance, when fewer calories are
consumed than are expended (e.g., typically only 1%-6% of total
caloric expenditure in most circumstances but up to 10% during
prolonged exercise in a glycogen-depleted state) (98, 164). In this
case, the protein cannot be used for the intended purpose of
replacing the amino acid pool. When caloric intake goes down,
protein requirement goes up (101). Therefore, the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) established an Acceptable Macronutrient
Distribution Range (AMDR) for protein, which covers a wide
range of protein intake. The AMDR is 5% to 20% of total calories for
children ages 1 to 3 years, 10% to 30% of total calories for children
ages 4 to 18 years, and 10% to 35% of total calories for adults older
than age 18 years (164). Adult men and women typically consume
an average of 16% of their calories from protein (68). The AMDR for
a nutrient includes a range of intakes associated with reduced risk of
chronic disease while still providing adequate intakes of other
essential nutrients (118). Though the DRI for protein fits within the
AMDR, the DRI is based solely on body weight and therefore does
not take low or high calorie intakes into account. Based on the
AMDR, when calorie intake is lower, protein needs to go up as a
percentage of total calorie intake by approximately 1% for every
100-calorie decrease below 2,000 calories. When total calorie intake
is higher, protein needs, expressed as a percentage of total caloric
intake, go down to a certain point. In practice, sports dietitians
552
