Step 6: Volume
Volume–load relates to the total amount of weight lifted in a training session,
and a set is a group of repetitions sequentially performed before the athlete
stops to rest. Repetition-volume is the total number of repetitions performed
during a workout session, and volume–load is the total number of sets multiplied
by the number of repetitions per set, then multiplied by the weight lifted per
repetition. For example, the volume–load for 2 sets of 10 repetitions with 50
pounds (23 kg) would be expressed as 2 × 10 × 50 pounds or 1,000 pounds
(454 kg). (If different sets are performed with different amounts of weight, the
volumes per set are calculated and then added to obtain the total training
session volume.)
In running exercise, the common (rep) volume measure is distance. If an
intensity value is known or measured (e.g., running pace, which relates to
percent V̇ O2max), total metabolic energy cost (which is proportional to
mechanical work done) can be calculated. This value is comparable to volume–
load in resistance exercise. The same concepts are applicable to the number of
foot or hand contacts (volume) in plyometric exercise (note that the intensity is
not considered when counting contacts but should be considered carefully by the
coach), the number of strokes (volume) in swimming or rowing, or the number
of throws or jumps (volume) for various sport activities.
Single Versus Multiple Sets
Single-set training may be appropriate for untrained individuals (50) or during
the first several months of training (61), but many studies indicate that higher
volumes are necessary to promote further gains in strength, especially for
intermediate and advanced resistance-trained athletes (126, 177, 182). For
example, performing 3 sets of 10 repetitions without going to failure enhances
strength better than one set to failure in 8 to 12 repetitions (90), although the
higher training volume with the use of 3 sets is a contributing factor (50, 162).
Therefore, an athlete who performs multiple sets from the initiation of their
resistance training program will increase muscular strength faster than with
single-set training (90). The strength and conditioning professional cannot
expect, however, that an athlete will be able to successfully complete multiple
sets with full RM loads at fixed repetition schemes for every exercise in each
training session. Fatigue will affect the number of repetitions that can be
performed in later sets (116, 150), which is why a RIR approach may be
advantageous. It should also be noted that training to failure is not necessary for
optimal adaptations (36, 63, 137, 191). Refalo and colleagues (132) also
demonstrated that the closer the proximity to failure, the greater the magnitude
1247
