carbohydrate digestion will be limited when the intestinal transporter for fructose
becomes saturated. Therefore, consuming multiple types of carbohydrates
together, such as sucrose, fructose, and glucose or maltodextrin, increases the
rate of carbohydrate absorption and exogenous carbohydrate oxidation
compared to consuming an isocaloric amount of just one type of sugar (62). In
addition to improving the rate of carbohydrate use by the body, consuming
multiple types of carbohydrate during exercise was found to improve cycling
time-trial performance after 120 minutes of cycling (the study design simulated
the last few stages of an aerobic endurance race when an athlete must provide
maximum effort) when subjects were provided glucose combined with fructose
versus glucose only at a rate of 1.8 grams per minute (108 g of carbohydrate per
hour) (34). Additionally, athletes given 36 grams of glucose and fructose every
15 minutes had a better 100 kilometer (62 miles) cycling time than cyclists given
only glucose every 15 minutes (137).
In addition to actually ingesting carbohydrates, simply rinsing carbohydrates
through the mouth (without actually ingesting them) seems to improve
performance lasting approximately 1 hour by 2% to 3%, presumably by affecting
the central nervous system (64).
In addition to providing carbohydrates during an aerobic endurance activity,
adding protein to a carbohydrate gel led to increased time until exhaustion
during a bout of cycling while also attenuating the rise in creatine kinase (a
marker of muscle damage) during cycling, due either to the protein itself or to
the additional calories provided by the protein (119). A meta-analysis and review
of the research examining how the addition of protein to carbohydrate affects
aerobic endurance performance revealed mixed findings (119). Only time-to-
exhaustion studies showed that the addition of protein made a significant
difference. However, these studies were not controlled for calorie intake during
the trial; therefore, it is unclear if any benefit was due to protein or to the added
calories provided by the protein. The three time-trial studies showed no
difference between carbohydrate only and carbohydrate plus protein (127).
Fructose and Gastrointestinal Symptoms
Fructose, a sugar found naturally in fruit and also added to a number of foods and beverages,
including many sports nutrition products, is often blamed for symptoms of stomach upset during
exercise. Though some people do not completely absorb fructose and may therefore experience
bloating, gas, abdominal discomfort, and alterations in bowel functioning after consuming this
sugar (123), studies have not examined gastrointestinal symptoms related to fructose ingestion
alone in athletes. Thus, athletes need to test, in practice, whether changing their sport drinks or
other products they consume during training (and testing fructose-free conditions) helps alleviate
any gastrointestinal symptoms they may be having (126). Athletes with irritable bowel syndrome
are more likely to have a problem absorbing fructose and therefore experience side effects (123).
627
