Quantity
SI
(international)
unit
Conversion
multiplier
Traditional
(British)
unit
Conversion
multiplier
SI
(international)
unit
Torque
newton-meter
× 0.738 =
foot-pound
× 1.356 =
newton-meter
Reprinted by permission from D.W. Powell and M.A. Bryanton Jones, “Biomechanics,” in
NSCA’s Essentials of Personal Training, 3rd ed., edited by B.J. Schoenfeld, R.L. Snarr
(Human Kinetics, 2022), 45.
We can measure the velocity of the barbell with measurement
devices such as accelerometers (measures the acceleration of the
object from which velocity can be calculated) and linear position
transducers (devices that have a cable that is extracted as the
barbell is lifted upward, and retracts as it is lowered, recording how
far and how fast this happens). Consider a set of standing overhead
barbell presses with 60 kilograms for which we have velocity data.
How can we calculate the work performed to move the barbell? The
displacement of the barbell during the first repetition was 0.541
meters. We take this and multiply it by the mass of the barbell and
then multiply this by gravity using equation 2.3 like so:
60 kg × 9.81 m ∙ s−2 × 0.541 m = 318.43 J    (2.5)
Or we could calculate potential energy and kinetic energy on a
sample-by-sample basis. The linear position transducer that was
used to collect the barbell press velocity data records at a sampling
frequency of 1,000 hertz (Hz, or samples per second). We then add
these together and calculate the change, which provides the same
result as the one shown in equation 2.5. What happens if the barbell
mass is increased or it is lifted over a greater range of motion? If we
add 20 kilograms to the barbell and lift it over the same range of
movement, the work performed on it increases to 424.58 joules. To
achieve that amount of work with the same load on the barbell, the
athlete would have to lift it over approximately 33% farther (0.721
m vs. 0.541 m). If this athlete performs multiple repetitions during a
set and, as should be the case, the range of movement remains
fairly constant, we can multiply the work performed on the barbell
132
