ventilatory threshold, hydrogen ion buffering, use of fat as a fuel
source, and improved exercise economy (76).
Lactate Threshold
In aerobic endurance events, the best competitor among athletes
with similar V̇ O2max values is typically the person who can sustain
aerobic energy production at the highest percentage of his or her
V̇ O2max without accumulating large amounts of lactic acid in the
muscle and blood (74). Although numerous terms have been used to
refer to this phenomenon, lactate threshold (LT) is the one most
commonly employed in the literature. Lactate threshold is that speed
of movement or percentage of V̇ O2max at which a specific blood
lactate concentration is observed (i.e., 4 mmol/L of blood) or the
point at which blood lactate concentration begins to increase above
resting levels (136). Several studies have shown that an athlete’s LT
appears to be a better indicator of his or her aerobic endurance
performance than V̇ O2max (7, 113). The maximal lactate steady
state (MLSS) is another term that often appears in the aerobic
endurance training literature. The MLSS is defined as the exercise
intensity at which maximal lactate production is equal to maximal
lactate clearance within the body (14). MLSS is an indicator of the
transition from heavy to severe exercise intensity (70). In other
words, while lactate production increases at the onset of exercise in
the heavy exercise intensity domain, it plateaus and can be
maintained at a steady state at this elevated level. However, if
exercise intensity increases further, now entering the severe domain,
lactate increases continually until failure. Notably, MLSS is also
synonymous with critical power (CP) and critical speed (CS) in this
regard. The MLSS is considered by many to be a better indicator of
aerobic endurance performance than either V̇ O2max or the LT (14).
What is clear from this information is that aerobic endurance
athletes must improve their LT and MLSS. This requires athletes to
conduct some training at elevated levels of blood and muscle lactate
to maximize training improvements in these areas.
1517
