specific 
needs, 
abilities, 
and 
aspirations 
of 
the
individual.
Children who participate in resistance training programs are likely
to undergo periods of reduced training or inactivity due to program
design factors, extended travel plans, busy schedules, injury,
involvement in multiple sports, or decreased motivation. This
temporary reduction or withdrawal of the training stimulus is called
detraining. In children, unlike adults, the evaluation of strength
changes during the detraining phase is complicated by the growth-
related strength increases during the same period. Nevertheless,
data indicate that training-induced strength gains in children are
impermanent and tend to return to untrained control group values
during the detraining period (55, 69). In one report, participation in
physical education classes and organized sports throughout an eight-
week detraining period did not maintain the preadolescents’ training-
induced strength gains (69). In another study comparing the effects
on children of one and two days per week of resistance training,
participants who resistance trained only once per week averaged
67% of the strength gains of participants who resistance trained
twice per week (63). While increased training frequency is related to
a greater strength training effect in youth (15), this finding must be
considered in light of lifestyle factors (e.g., nutrition and sleep) and
other commitments that youth or young athletes may have (e.g.,
competitive playing schedule, schoolwork, time to interact with
peers). Though the precise mechanisms responsible for the
detraining response remain unclear, it seems likely that changes in
neuromuscular functioning are at least partly responsible. Further,
the detraining effect may not be homogenous, with different
neuromuscular qualities in young children showing different
responses following the cessation of a training program (55, 172).
The potential trainability of children and adolescents is evident
from research studies that have adopted long-term training
intervention periods. For example, a series of studies examined the
402
