Step 7: Rest Periods
The time dedicated to recovery between sets and exercises is called the rest
period or inter-set rest. The length of the rest period between sets and
exercises is highly dependent on the goal of training, the relative load lifted, and
the athlete’s training status. (If the athlete is not in good physical condition, rest
periods initially may need to be longer than typically assigned.)
The amount of rest between sets is strongly related to load; the heavier the
loads lifted, the longer the rest periods the athlete will need between sets to
safely and successfully complete the prescribed subsequent sets and to promote
higher quality training. For example, training for muscular strength with 4RM
loads would likely require significantly longer rest periods between sets than
training for muscular endurance in which lighter 15RM loads are lifted. Despite
the relationship between training goals and the length of rest periods (e.g., long
rest periods for muscular strength training programs), not all exercises in a
resistance training program should be assigned the same rest periods. It is
important that the strength and conditioning professional allocate rest periods
based on the relative load lifted and the amount of muscle mass involved in
each exercise. An example of this specificity is for an assistance exercise as part
of a muscular strength training program. Whereas a core exercise such as the
bench press may involve a 4RM load and a 4-minute rest period, an assistance
exercise such as the lateral shoulder raise may be performed with a 12RM load
and therefore require only a 1-minute rest period (even though 1-min rest
periods generally apply to a hypertrophy training program). The recommended
rest period lengths for strength, power, hypertrophy, and muscular endurance
programs are shown in table 18.15.
TABLE 18.15 Rest Period Length Assignments Based on the
Training Goal
Training goal*
Rest period length
Strength
2-5 min
Power (single- and multiple-effort event)
2-5 min
*Because there are occasions when the prescribed percentage of the 1RM for assistance exercises falls
outside the range associated with the training goal (e.g., ≥8RM loads are recommended for assistance
exercises as part of a muscular strength training program [2]), the strength and conditioning professional
should examine the loads used for each exercise when assigning rest periods rather than generally
applying the guidelines for a training goal.
Data from Fleck and Kraemer (2014); Gettman and Pollock (1981); Robinson et al. (1995); Scala et al.
(1987); Schoenfeld et al. (2016); Stone and O’Bryant (1987); Stone et al. (2022); Tesch et al. (1986).
1253
