have policies and recommendations to avoid food poisoning and
food contamination. (See Standard 9.1 in the NSCA Strength and
Conditioning Professional Standards and Guidelines for additional
detail on the responsibility of strength and conditioning professionals
related to supplements, ergogenic aids, and drugs [16].)
Locker and Changing Room Access
Access to locker rooms is a good benefit within a facility. At
minimum, having a shower located somewhere in the building
ensures that cleaning up after a workout will be convenient. Good
hygiene is important for preventing the spread of infections and
disease. Although not everyone will use the showers or lockers,
having them available for on-the-go athletes may boost morale and
give them another reason to work hard during a workout.
Storage Spaces
A strength and conditioning facility should have a dedicated storage
space to keep items such as extra equipment, cleaning supplies,
facility maintenance tools, or broken equipment. A larger facility with
more equipment requires more storage space than a small facility.
Depending on the layout of the facility, or if it has multiple floors,
multiple storage areas may be best to avoid excessive clutter or
injury from equipment not being used. For example, an athlete or
strength and conditioning professional may injure his or her fingers
while racking and storing weights on a plate tree in a space that is
too narrow and filled with unnecessary equipment accessories.
Additional areas to watch for excessive clutter include underneath
dumbbell storage racks, around shelving units, in suspension training
areas (8), and in corners and other tight spaces. Making sure that
equipment is stored safely and securely improves weight room
organization and maintains the longevity of the equipment.
In addition to the storage of training equipment, all necessary
emergency equipment should be kept in or near the training facility
to be quickly accessible (16). Such equipment must include a fire
1749
