training frequency, with lesser-trained athletes requiring more
recovery days at the beginning of a training period than more highly
trained athletes. The sport phase or season that the athlete is
currently in can also influence training frequency; an off-season
program may include three to four training days per week, but
training frequency may progress to daily workouts (or even multiple
workouts per day for triathletes and highly competitive distance
runners) in the preseason. Additionally, fewer training sessions may
be required to maintain an achieved level of physiological function or
performance than to attain that level initially (128). Appropriate
training frequency is important for the aerobic endurance athlete,
because too much training may increase the risk of injury, illness, or
overtraining (i.e., maximum tolerable dose). While some evidence
shows a positive relationship between exercise frequency and
increased injury rates (63), these studies used active individuals in a
wide age range, not only young and healthy athletes, as subjects.
Additional research has shown injuries are multifactorial and there is
insufficient evidence definitively associating injuries with increases or
high levels of training frequency, volume, or other training factors
(44). Conversely, too little training will not result in positive
adaptations to the various systems of the body (i.e., below the
minimum effective dose). Research has shown that it is necessary to
train more than twice per week in order to increase V̇ O2max (138).
Many strength and conditioning professionals recognize that multiple
training sessions per day may be needed to improve performance in
some aerobic endurance athletes. For athletes participating in single-
discipline sports such as running, such training practices should be
reserved for those with an advanced or elite training status due to
the level of physiological stress involved with such programs.
Research conducted by Hansen and colleagues (58) showed that
time to exhaustion, resting muscle glycogen concentrations, and
citrate synthase activity increased among seven healthy untrained
men after 10 weeks of training twice every other day versus once
daily. It was speculated that training in a glycogen-depleted state
1521
