Goals of Rehabilitation and
Reconditioning
The strength and conditioning professional must consider both the
athlete’s subjective response to injury and the physiological
mechanisms of tissue healing; both are essential in relation to an
athlete’s return to optimal performance. The process of returning to
competition following injury involves healing of the injured tissues,
preparation of these tissues for the return to function, and use of
proper techniques to maximize rehabilitation and reconditioning.
While the goal is often a rapid resumption of activity, it is important
to remember that each athlete responds differently to injury and
thus progresses uniquely during rehabilitation.
As a preface to discussion of the goals of treatment during injury
rehabilitation, two points must be made. First, healing tissue must
not be overstressed (70). During tissue healing, controlled
therapeutic stress is necessary to optimize collagen matrix formation
(8, 29), but too much stress can damage new structures and
significantly slow the athlete’s return to competition. This means
choosing a level of loading that provides neither too much stress nor
too little stress to the athlete’s healing tissue. It should be obvious
that when one is choosing the load, it is necessary to consider the
phase of healing and athlete type. For example, an exercise that
provides too little tissue loading during the maturation–remodeling
phase may provide too much loading (increased tissue stress) during
the inflammatory response phase. Further, an exercise that provides
too little stress to a professional basketball center may be excessive
for an amateur cross country runner. The plane of movement is
another necessary consideration. As an example, the medial
collateral ligament of the knee is subject to the greatest stress when
loaded in the frontal plane (i.e., valgus stress) during terminal knee
extension. Therefore, if the athlete has a medial collateral ligament
injury, frontal plane movements (valgus stress) such as a lateral box
1644
