Consequently, the onset of blood lactate accumulation (OBLA)
(see chapter 3) occurs at a higher percentage (up to 80%-90%) of
the trained athlete’s aerobic capacity.
The muscular component of an aerobic endurance training
program involves submaximal muscle contractions extended over a
large number of repetitions with little recovery. Therefore, the
relative intensity is very low, and the overall volume is very high.
This manner of training encourages relative increases in aerobic
potential that are similar in type I and type II fibers (167).
Compared to type II fibers, type I fibers have a higher preexisting
initial aerobic capacity, to which the increase in aerobic potential
from training is added (53). Thus, type I fibers possess an oxidative
capacity greater than that of type II fibers both before and after
training. However, it should be noted while aerobic endurance
training has been found to encourage relative increases in aerobic
potential that are similar in type I and type II fibers (167), such
training has also been found to reduce type I and type II fiber size
while maintaining or improving the functional ability of the fibers
(157). After 13 weeks of marathon running training, a reduction of
20% in muscle fiber size in both fiber types was found, while
strength in both fiber types was maintained and actually increased
by 18% in type IIa fibers following a three-week taper (157).
Little evidence shows that type II fibers change into type I fibers
as a result of aerobic endurance training, but there may be a gradual
conversion within the two major type II fiber subgroups of type IIx
fibers to type IIa fibers (4, 167). This adaptation is significant, in
that type IIa fibers possess a greater oxidative capacity than type IIx
fibers and have functional characteristics more similar to those of
type I fibers. However, it should also be noted that hybrid fibers,
which can have a combination of two or three isoforms (pure fibers),
are also present in skeletal muscles and can experience similar
adaptations (80). Hybrid fibers can increase or decrease depending
on the muscle’s composition before exercise as well as the exercise
stimulus encountered (110). In the case of an athlete undertaking
347
