Implementing movement screens can be complex due to variations in implementation practices,
criteria, grading, and movement analysis. Understanding reliability of screen implementers is
critical, although both novice and expert raters can achieve substantial reliability (104). Recording
movements for retrospective analysis after testing is recommended, because it allows raters to
review video footage, pause, slow down, and rewatch to accurately assess movements. The
number of repetitions performed and how they are graded are crucial. Due to ongoing brain
maturation, youth exhibit higher movement variability, and performance regressions can coincide
with growth spurts (54, 68). Therefore, movement screens should assess each repetition for
consistency. Some screens, such as the FMS and RTSB, use a best repetition technique, which limits
the assessment of movement consistency. Others, like the TJA, use a sum-of-repetition scoring
system, capturing movement variability. Considering total body versus segmental analysis is also
important because total body approaches like the FMS may miss specific deficiencies or
compensations, whereas segmental analysis provides detailed insights (123).
Flexibility
Flexibility can be defined as the range of motion about a body joint (13). Typical devices for
measuring flexibility include manual and electric goniometers, which measure joint angle, and the
sit-and-reach box, which is used to evaluate the combined flexibility of the lower back and hips.
Flexibility measurements are more reliable when standardized warm-up and static stretching
precede the flexibility assessment. During a flexibility test, the athlete should move slowly into the
fully stretched position and hold this position. Ballistic stretching, characterized by bouncing to
increase range of motion, cannot be allowed during any flexibility testing (69, 116).
A number of movement competency screens are available for strength and conditioning
professionals and can be used to assess overall flexibility, mobility, and general movement
competency of athletes. However, there is no current consensus on which screen to use, nor a
clearly established link between movement screening results and injury (98, 116). Competent
strength and conditioning professionals perform postural and performance screening routinely by
viewing the athletes’ performance in training. For example, the overhead squat is a common
exercise that is used as a part of movement screens because it allows assessment of bilateral
mobility of the hips, knees, and ankles along with the shoulder and thoracic spine (3, 25, 126).
Balance and Stability
Balance is the ability to maintain static and dynamic equilibrium or the ability to maintain the
body’s center of gravity over its base of support (103, 124). Stability is a measure of the ability to
return to a desired position following a postural disturbance (103). Athletes with poor balance are
at a greater risk of lower limb injuries (76, 77, 96). Athletes have also been shown to have greater
balance compared to nonathletes (38). Balance testing can be used to assess stability increases
with training and in a number of different ways (103). Commonly used tests include timed static
standing tests (eyes closed and standing on one or both legs) (21, 101), balance tests using
unstable surfaces (101), and tests using specialized balance testing equipment (e.g., NeuroCom,
Biodex Balance System) (124). These include a large number of tests that can evaluate different
aspects of balance and stability (103). The balance error scoring system (BESS) and star excursion
balance test (SEBT) have very good reliability and a substantial body of literature supporting their
use (21, 57, 66, 103, 115, 146).
Body Composition
Body composition usually refers to the relative proportions by weight of fat and lean tissue.
Although there are sophisticated and expensive devices capable of partitioning the lean component
into bone and soft tissue, the body composition procedures typically performed by strength and
772
