Inflammatory Response Phase
Inflammation is the initial reaction to injury (34, 36) and is
necessary for normal tissue healing to occur. Both local and systemic
inflammation occur during the inflammatory response phase,
allowing the eventual healing and replacement of damaged tissue.
During the inflammatory phase, several events transpire that
contribute to both tissue healing and an initial decrease in function.
The injured area becomes red and swollen due to changes in
vascularity, blood flow, and capillary permeability. After tissues are
damaged, a locally hypoxic environment leads to a certain amount of
tissue death that allows the release of several chemical mediators,
including histamine and bradykinin. These substances further
increase blood flow and capillary permeability in this local area,
thereby promoting edema and fluid accumulation into the
surrounding tissues. Edema elevates intraarticular pressure, which
inhibits the motor neurons required for muscle activation (22, 84).
Thus, edema can lead to muscle weakness and atrophy as well as
limited function (22, 59). Tissue debris and pathogens (i.e.,
infectious agents) are removed from the injured area by increased
blood flow and a process called phagocytosis; phagocytosis involves
macrophages (i.e., a type of white blood cell), which engulf cellular
debris to speed tissue healing. Additionally, fibroblast cells in nearby
tissues are activated and begin to migrate toward the injury site to
assist with healing. At this time, macrophages and platelets within
the injured area release growth factors that assist in the transition
to the fibroblastic repair phase (see next section).
The inflammatory substances present during this phase may
result in stimulation of pain receptors (i.e., nociceptors), causing the
injured athlete to sense pain, further contributing to decreased
function. This phase typically lasts 72 hours following an acute injury
but may last longer with a compromised blood supply and more
severe structural damage. Though the inflammatory phase is critical
to tissue healing, if it does not end within a reasonable amount of
1641
