spotter (sometimes with just a grunt or sound) for help, and the
spotter needs to immediately attempt to provide the amount of
assistance needed. If the athlete cannot contribute anything to the
completion of the repetition, the athlete should immediately tell the
spotter to “take it” or use some other phrase agreed on before the
lift. Regardless of when or why the spotter is needed to assist, he or
she should take the bar—if possible—from the athlete quickly and
smoothly, trying to avoid abrupt changes in the amount of load
being handled by the athlete. The athlete should try to stay with the
bar until it is racked or placed safely on the floor. This helps to
protect both the spotter and athlete from injury.
The spotting guidelines provided in the exercise technique
checklists are appropriate for a typical training environment. Spotting
procedures may vary when excessively heavy loads are being used—
such as 1RM attempts—because more spotters are typically needed.
Guidelines for Spotting
Certain exercises that require spotting (over the face or neck and on the back)
have a higher level of difficulty and thus warrant additional safety considerations.
In any exercise where the potential for injury might occur, spotting should be used.
Spotting is necessary on skillful multijoint exercises that involve a barbell or
dumbbells being lifted over the head, on the back, on the front of the
shoulders, or over the face.
Exercises done overhead and with a bar racked on the back or in front of the
shoulders may require more than one spotter, and multiple spotters must be
taught how and where to spot the exercise.
Spotting over-the-face exercises requires the spotter to grasp the implement
being lifted or the athlete’s wrists. Spotters must be trained to grasp the
implement properly and even assist athletes in reracking the bar or returning
dumbbells to the start position in case an exercise becomes too difficult to
complete safely on their own.
Power exercises are not spotted due to the safety factors for the athlete and
the spotter or spotters, and athletes should be taught how to miss properly
when learning these exercises.
Determining the number of spotters for certain exercises depends on a
number of factors, especially the amount of load being used, because the
likelihood of injury can increase greatly with heavier loads.
961
