you need?” and “What equipment needs to fit into the allotted
space?” The needs analysis should be consistent with the specific
programming needs of the strength and conditioning and athletic
departments. For example, if a strength and conditioning
professional regularly incorporates jump testing on force plates
during weight room sessions, an area needs to be set aside for that
activity. For those serving on the design committee, the needs
analysis should convey an effective environment to properly
implement the intended program. While site, budget, construction,
and other limitations may require a certain level of flexibility as the
project progresses, safety considerations for facility users should not
be jeopardized (2-7, 9-17, 19-22).
The second part of the predesign phase is called a feasibility
study. This process should analyze strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats (known as a SWOT analysis) (10). The
goal of the feasibility study is to ensure that the financial investment
will yield a viable and sustainable return. The feasibility study should
also evaluate the location, strengths and weaknesses of any
proposed ideas, and the growth potential for strength and
conditioning and related programs within the department. The
potential opportunities and competition threats also need to be
considered. This includes market evaluation to identify the best
opportunity to train athletes most efficiently, as well as analyzing the
target market and growth potential of competing facilities. In the
collegiate environment, this may include comparisons to other
facilities in the athletic conference or be related to athlete recruiting
goals. The aim of the feasibility study is to help determine if the
facility will have an opportunity for success against competing
programs and businesses.
The master plan is the general plan for all phases of the new
facility. The master plan should include the building and construction
plan, facility design, budget information, and an operational plan to
act on once the facility is completed (10). The operational plan
should consist of short-term and long-term goals that will enhance
1730
