called very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), are more
atherogenic (artery clogging) than larger LDL particles (50). High
levels of saturated or trans fats, weight gain, and anorexia can all
increase LDL cholesterol (159). However, VLDL levels increase with
increasing intake of carbohydrate (116). High levels of high-
density lipoproteins (HDL) are protective against heart disease
but are not a target of therapy (practitioners are told not to focus on
HDL). Table 10.12 shows how LDL, total, and HDL cholesterol are
classified.
High intake of refined carbohydrates, weight gain, excessive
alcohol intake, and very-low-fat diets can increase triglycerides
(blood fats). However, as with cholesterol, several factors affect
triglycerides, including a sedentary lifestyle, overweight or obesity,
smoking, genetics, and certain diseases and medications (126, 159).
For optimal cardiovascular health, and risk reduction of chronic
diseases, the Scientific Report of the 2020 Dietary Guidelines
Advisory Committee recommends limiting saturated fat to less than
10% of total calories and replacing saturated fat with unsaturated
fat, particularly polyunsaturated fat. As of June 2018, partially
hydrogenated oils (PHOs), the major source of artificial trans fat in
the food supply, and a major cause of dyslipidemia, are no longer
Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS). Therefore, PHOs are no
longer added to foods. In addition, it is advised that added sugars,
particularly from sugar-sweetened beverages, desserts, sweet
snacks, candies, and sweetened breakfast cereals, are consumed at
a maximum of 10% of total calories (154).
Fat and Performance
Both intramuscular and circulating fatty acids are potential energy
sources during exercise. Compared with the limited capacity of the
body to store carbohydrate, fat stores are large and represent a vast
source of fuel for exercise (20). For example, a lean runner who is
160 pounds (72 kg) with 4% body fat has approximately 22,400
calories stored within fat tissue (57). At rest and during low-intensity
569
