Nutrition Strategies for Altering Body
Composition
Athletes who want to alter their body composition typically need to gain muscle,
lose body fat, or both. Although there are some scenarios (typically in those with
eating disorders) in which an athlete may need to gain both muscle and fat, this
section focuses on gaining muscle and losing body fat.
The first step toward altering body composition involves estimating calorie
needs (though calorie is the common term, the technical term is kilocalorie).
The number of calories an athlete needs each day depends on a number of
factors including genetics, body weight, body composition, training program, and
age. Children and adolescents also need calories for growth and development.
Basal metabolic rate (BMR) is by far the largest contributor to total energy
expenditure, accounting for approximately 65% to 70% of daily energy
expenditure (63, 114). It is a measure of the calories required for maintaining
normal body functions such as respiration, blood circulation, and gastrointestinal
and renal processing. Basal metabolic rate and resting metabolic rate (RMR)
are often used interchangeably, though they are slightly different. Basal
metabolic rate is measured after an overnight fast (12-14 h without food) with
the subject resting supine and motionless but awake (2, 40). Resting metabolic
rate is often used instead of BMR due to the ease of measurement (an overnight
fast is not required), yet it is 10% to 20% higher than BMR due to increased
energy expenditure resulting from recent food intake or physical activity
completed earlier in the day. Several factors influence BMR and RMR, particularly
fat-free mass, which explains approximately 70% to 80% of the difference in
RMR among individuals (93, 115, 138). Other factors include age, nutrition
status, genetics, and differences in endocrine functioning (such as hypo- or
hyperthyroidism).
The second-largest component of an individual’s energy requirement is the
energy expended in physical activity. Of all the components, it is the most
variable among individuals. The number of calories expended through physical
activity increases with the frequency, intensity, and duration of the training
program, as well as nontraining daily activity (e.g., washing a car or doing
housework). Typically, 20% to 30% of total daily energy expenditure is from
physical activity, though this figure may be considerably higher in athletes (63,
114). The highest energy costs are seen in aerobic activities performed by large
athletes for long periods of time, whereas the lowest energy costs are associated
with skill and power sports performed by smaller athletes.
642
