that any adjacent pool or spa areas are equipped with negative
exhaust air flow helps to prevent moisture and chlorine odor from
escaping into other areas of the training facility (2).
Ventilation and circulation are primary concerns with regard to
facility design and the HVAC system. The HVAC system, a fresh air
exchange system, and ceiling or box fans should provide necessary
ventilation and circulation that are in accordance with ANSI/ASHRAE
62.1 requirements for health clubs and weight rooms (6). Air
systems must provide air circulation at proper levels according to the
needs of specific equipment areas and occupant loads (6). For
example, aerobic training areas require a higher circulation rate than
resistance training spaces (2). Room air should be exchanged a
minimum of 8 to 10 times per hour—optimally 12 to 15 times per
hour to prevent odors and stagnant air (5). If fans are used, a
general guideline is two to four fans for every 1,200 square feet (111
m2). Fans help keep the air from feeling stagnant and muggy, which
makes for a better training environment.
Sound Systems and Noise Control
While not essential, many facilities have sound systems that help
create a motivating training environment conducive to hard work.
The two main considerations for installing a sound system are
speaker volume and placement. The sound volume should be less
than 90 decibels so that athletes can hear instructions and coaching
cues (2). To avoid damage, speakers should be elevated above the
height of all training equipment. Placing speakers in the corner
allows sound to project toward the middle of the room so that it is
more 
evenly 
distributed. 
The 
use 
of 
headphones 
is 
not
recommended. Headphones can interfere with coaching and
instruction and limit athletes’ awareness of their surroundings in the
case of an emergency.
Background noise and excess external noise are other issues to
consider. Such sounds can emanate from sources ranging from the
HVAC system to the people in the next building. In a facility that has
1746
