can contribute greatly to an athlete’s overall development, as well as
optimally preparing the athlete for the next session (48).
The warm-up is an integral part of the training session.
Strength and conditioning professionals should plan
warm-ups incorporating short-, medium-, and long-term
considerations that will contribute to the overall
development of the athlete.
In recent times, the use of structured and standardized warm-up
systems such as the FIFA 11 has become more prevalent and
emphasizes medium- and longer-term planning, often with the goal
of injury reduction through the sequenced development of physical
characteristics associated with a reduction in injury risk (2, 5, 33).
The results of these have been encouraging and demonstrate the
potential for longer term planning of warm-ups to contribute to
athletic development (2, 5). However, despite the success of this
approach, uptake has been surprisingly low; a potential reason for
this has been the standardized structure in which activities are
preprescribed that does not allow for flexible application (2).
Whereas structures such as the FIFA 11 are preprescribed, it is
likely that a range of potentially effective warm-ups exist (89) and
that these need to be able to adapt to specific situations and over
time as the needs of the athletes change (89). Rather than use a
single preprescribed approach, a more applicable approach can be to
provide a structure around which to plan the warm-up, one that
allows for variability and progression. The structure of general and
specific warm-up, though valid, may need to be supplemented by an
approach that allows for greater targeting of both short- and long-
term performance. One such flexible structure that has been
adopted by many coaches and that addresses all of the key aspects
of an effective warm-up is the raise, activate and mobilize, and
potentiate (RAMP) protocol (51). This builds on the general and
specific structure and provides a suitable approach whereby
861
