risk factors could be identified through a screening process for bone
stress injuries, such as vitamin D levels and early sport specialization
(1, 180). Continuing to prescribe exercises that are osteogenically
stimulating and alerting workload through periodization may assist in
reducing bone stress injuries for female athletes.
Concussions
A concussion, or mild traumatic brain injury, is an impact to the
head or body that causes the brain to move rapidly back and forth in
the skull, which disrupts normal brain function (73). Female athletes
are at an increased incidence of sport-related concussions in some
sports (soccer, basketball, softball), with hockey having the highest
incidence of concussions compared to male athletes in similar sports
(35, 41, 133). Female athletes have been shown to have twice the
rate of contact with equipment and surfaces compared to male
athletes. However, player-to-player contact has been shown to be
similar in both female and male athletes for causing concussions (32,
97). Other factors, such as biomechanical and hormonal differences,
may lead to a greater susceptibility of concussions in female athletes
(109, 151, 161). Female athletes experience longer recovery time
with prolonged symptoms after a concussion compared to male
athletes (32, 41, 109, 161). When multiple concussions occur, female
athletes experience lower cerebral blood flow (70) and greater
changes between single- and dual-task gait activities compared to a
single concussive event (81).
Concussion 
management, 
prevention, 
and 
return-to-play
programs should consider the sex differences in injury mechanics.
However, due to a lack of female athlete–specific research in
concussion management programs, there should be an individualized
approach for concussion management and return to play based on
clinical presentation, regardless of sex (109, 151). The American
Medical Association for Sports Medicine position statement on
concussion in sport can guide practitioners on the clinical diagnosis,
assessment, and management in athletic populations (73).
447
