eating meals every 3 to 4 hours (81, 107) in order to facilitate meeting daily
protein targets.
The amount of data on muscle protein synthesis in children is limited because
invasive measurement procedures are required (17), and no studies have
examined muscle protein synthesis after training and postworkout protein
ingestion in healthy children. However, one thing is clear with regard to children:
Due to size differences as well as the impact of insulin and calorie intake on
protein synthesis, their per-meal protein intake targets will naturally be lower in
order to meet their protein needs (79), despite potentially having higher relative
needs. For more information about protein needs by sport, see table 11.3.
Nutrition for Various Performance Goals
Nutrition for Aerobic Endurance Performance and Recovery
•  Aerobic endurance athletes should aim to consume 8 to 10 grams of carbohydrate during their
most demanding training phases or competition and 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per kilogram body
weight per day throughout their training.
•  Athletes who eat at least 4 hours before competition should include approximately 1 to 4
grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight and 0.15 to 0.25 grams of protein per kilogram
body weight (131). If the precompetition meal is consumed 2 hours before exercise, athletes
should aim for approximately 1 gram of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight (120) and 0.15 to
0.25 grams of easily digestible protein per kilogram body weight.
•  Athletes should consume 28 to 144 grams of a mixture of multiple types of carbohydrate (e.g.,
sucrose, fructose, and glucose or maltodextrin) per hour during prolonged aerobic endurance
exercise to extend time until exhaustion and improve performance (32, 34, 66, 137).
•  During prolonged activity in hot weather, athletes should consume sport drinks containing 20
to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium
(78-195 mg) per liter, and carbohydrate in a concentration of 5% to 10% (2).
•  After exercise, approximately 1.2 to 2.0 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight
should be consumed within 30 minutes after stopping the exercise. The addition of protein appears
to facilitate glycogen replenishment if carbohydrate intake is below 1.2 grams per kilogram.
Additionally, some, though not all, studies show that the addition of protein to carbohydrate after a
workout may attenuate muscle breakdown and soreness and increase muscle protein synthesis.
The ideal amount of protein and the time period after exercise in which it should be consumed are
not clear based on the current body of literature and may depend on whether the exercise was
performed in the fed versus fasted state and on total calories consumed after a workout (44, 57,
85). However, as a general guideline, at least 20 to 40 grams of high-quality protein should also be
consumed within a 2-hour time period after aerobic endurance exercise (sooner may be better,
though the exact time period has yet to be elucidated in the research) (77).
•  Glycogen stores should be replenished after exercise and before the next bout of training. A
regular diet with sufficient carbohydrate intake can restore glycogen over the course of a 24-hour
period. For faster glycogen synthesis, athletes should eat or drink a high-carbohydrate meal
immediately after exercise and at regular intervals thereafter. This is especially important for
athletes who train again less than 24 hours after their initial training session (61).
Nutrition for Strength
637
