Reducing Risk of Injury and Reinjury
In addition to using strength training and conditioning strategies
when rehabilitating athletes from injuries, strength and conditioning
professionals can implement research findings to reduce both risk for
initial injury and risk of reinjury following injury (77, 90). Structured
programs have been developed for the lower (25, 28, 33, 76) and
upper extremities (57, 101). These programs are often sport specific
and address common risk factors for injury.
Previous injury is one of the most substantial risk factors for
future injury in active individuals (30, 75, 86, 91). Risk factors for
upper extremity injury include decreased glenohumeral range of
motion, scapular dyskinesis (i.e., abnormal scapular movement), and
decreased shoulder strength (9, 13, 101). Among overhead athletes,
shoulder internal rotation range of motion restrictions have been
shown to increase the risk for shoulder injury, whereas shoulder
external rotation and flexion range of motion restrictions are
associated with elbow injuries (7, 11, 42). Range of motion exercises
and the Throwers Ten are often used as a structured program to
reduce upper extremity injury risk (102). The Throwers Ten program
includes a specific set of upper extremity exercises and movements
designed to improve muscle performance as required for throwing
activities (26). Additional exercises shown to reduce the risk of upper
extremity injury among athletes include strengthening the shoulder
external rotators (figures 23.7a, b) and stretching the shoulder to
improve internal rotation (figures 23.8a, b) (14, 49, 64, 66, 78). Risk
factors for lower extremity injury include decreased balance,
decreased neuromuscular control during jump landing, and
decreased lower extremity muscle strength (3, 53, 103). Structured
lower extremity programs to reduce injury risk should be sport
specific and should focus on neuromuscular control during activities
such as landing from a jump and cutting. Two exercises that may be
used to reduce this risk of injury to the lower extremities are proper
jumping and landing technique during plyometric exercise (figure
1665
