Erythropoietin (EPO) is produced in the kidneys and stimulates
the production of new red blood cells. It is also a protein hormone
that can be produced by recombinant DNA techniques and is
reportedly being abused by athletes (64). Erythropoietin use was
one of the methods of doping that Lance Armstrong admitted to
over the course of his cycling career. The EPO level in the blood
increases in response to chronic aerobic endurance exercise. In
certain types of anemia, especially in kidney patients with
inadequate EPO production, recombinant human EPO can improve
the quality of life of the individual.
Efficacy
Injections of EPO are generally associated with elevations in both
hematocrit and hemoglobin. A 2013 systematic review and meta-
analysis indicated that EPO administration promotes increases in
hemoglobin and hematocrit of 5% to 17% and 8% to 19%,
respectively (108). These increases are accompanied by increases in
aerobic capacity and maximal power output of 7% to 10%, which
are in turn linked with improvements in time to exhaustion in open
endpoint exercise for both trained (9%-17%) and untrained
(22%-50%) individuals (108). Therefore, the ability of EPO to
enhance oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood suggests it is likely to
be an effective ergogenic aid for the aerobic endurance athlete.
Initial evidence also indicates that 16 days of EPO administration can
elicit changes in the skeletal muscle proteome in a manner that
supports aerobic exercise performance (e.g., increased oxidative
enzyme activity) (42). However, it is also important to note that the
effect of EPO administration on time trial performance or other
parameters critical toward aerobic exercise performance such as the
ventilatory threshold, critical velocity, or critical power is not well
understood. While much of the research conducted with EPO is
focused on endurance performance, there is theoretical rationale for
EPO use by anaerobic athletes to improve recovery from high-
intensity efforts.
694
