flexibility and mobility, and motor performance.
Characterized by high-intensity, intermittent bouts of exercise,
anaerobic training requires adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to be
regenerated at a faster rate than can be produced by oxidative
metabolism alone. Consequently, the energy requirement relies on a
greater proportion of energy coming from non-oxidative energy
systems, which include the phosphagen or creatine phosphate
system and a smaller proportion coming from glycolysis. Thus, the
term anaerobic training is used in this text to describe exercise
training that is performed at intensities that rely primarily on non-
oxidative metabolism to meet energy demands. Example modalities
include resistance training, plyometric drills, speed agility, and
interval training. Long-term adaptations that occur in response to
anaerobic training are specifically related to the characteristics of the
training program. For example, improvements in muscular strength,
power, hypertrophy, muscular endurance, motor skills, and
coordination are all recognized as beneficial adaptations following
anaerobic training modalities. Finally, while oxidative metabolism
plays a limited role in regenerating ATP during high-intensity
anaerobic activities, it still plays a critical role in the recovery of
energy stores during periods of low-intensity exercise (recovery) or
rest (49).
Exercises such as sprints and plyometric drills primarily stress the
phosphagen system; they are usually less than 10 seconds in
duration and minimize fatigue by allowing almost complete recovery
between sets (e.g., 5-7 min). Longer-duration, high-intensity,
interval-type training predominantly uses energy production from the
glycolytic system, in which shorter rest intervals (e.g., 20-60 s) are
adopted during high-intensity exercise. The integration of high-
intensity exercise with short rest periods is considered an important
aspect of anaerobic training, because athletes are often required to
perform near-maximal intensities under fatigued conditions during
competition. It is, however, critical that appropriate anaerobic
282
