All sports nutrition professionals must follow state nutrition
licensure laws, which vary from state to state and specify who is
allowed to provide individualized nutrition counseling and medical
nutrition therapy. For instance, in Louisiana, general nutrition
education can be provided by various disciplines if the information is
general, accurate, and not individualized (based on a specific
person’s dietary needs). However, only a licensed dietitian or
nutritionist can provide nutrition assessment and counseling.
Nutrition counseling is defined as “the provision of the individual
guidance on appropriate food and nutrient intake for those with
special 
needs, 
taking 
into 
consideration 
health, 
cultural,
socioeconomic, functional, and psychological facts from the nutrition
assessment. Nutrition counseling may include advice to increase or
decrease nutrients in the diet; to change the timing and size of and
composition of meals; to modify food textures, and in extreme
instances, to change the route of administration” (www.lbedn.org).
Many individuals without any (or with minimal) education in
nutrition and exercise science and little to no formal training refer to
themselves as sports nutritionists. Regardless of the specific title of
the person providing sports nutrition information or individualized
dietary advice, strength and conditioning professionals should take a
close look at the person’s education (including the curriculum),
previous work history (especially the person’s day-to-day job duties),
knowledge of sports nutrition, and years of experience.
Experienced sports dietitians help athletes make the
connection between plate and performance. They have
advanced knowledge, skills, and expertise in sports
nutrition.
The first step in nutrition coaching involves defining the athlete’s
goals and identifying the coach’s goals (since the two may be
different). After this, similar to the strength and conditioning
professional undertaking a needs analysis, the sports dietitian will
541
