During the weeks before the test, athletes should engage in enough training
to establish a baseline of fitness in the activity being tested. Strength and
conditioning professionals should be aware that responses to exercise in the
heat are highly individual.
Avoid testing under extreme combinations of heat and humidity. Figure 13.2
illustrates the combinations of temperature and humidity at which heat injury
risk is present.
Using temperature limits of at least 5 °F (3 °C) below those listed is
recommended, especially on sunny days, to provide a safety margin and
enable better test performance. On days when the temperature has exceeded
or is expected to exceed the recommended limits, indoor facilities should be
used if available, or testing should be conducted during morning or early
evening hours when temperatures are acceptable.
The athletes, especially those coming from cool climates, should be
acclimated to the heat and humidity for at least one week before testing.
Start with short workouts and progress to workouts of longer duration.
Athletes should make sure they are well hydrated in the 24-hour period
preceding aerobic endurance testing in the heat. A good indication of
adequate hydration is a plentiful volume of clear urine (refer to chapter 10 for
more detailed preexercise hydration guidelines). Salt tablets should generally
be avoided.
Athletes should be encouraged to drink during exercise in the heat. Plain
water is most appropriate for exercise up to 1 hour in duration. Snack breaks
during longer durations of training can help replenish fluids and be important
in replacing electrolytes. The amount and rate of fluid replacement depend
on individual sweat rates, duration of exercise, and environment. Refer to
chapter 10 for specific guidelines and how to calculate sweat rate if needed.
Athletes should wear a light-colored, loose-fitting tank top and shorts that are
breathable (i.e., synthetic porous, moisture-wicking material). Male athletes
may be allowed to go shirtless.
Heart rate may be monitored to detect reactions to the heat.
Be attentive to possible symptoms of heatstroke or heat exhaustion: cramps,
nausea, dizziness, difficulty in walking or standing, faintness, garbled speech,
lack of sweat, red or ashen skin, and goose bumps.
Be aware of the symptoms of hyponatremia or water intoxication, a
potentially fatal condition in which excess water intake reduces blood sodium
to dangerously low levels. Symptoms may include extremely diluted urine in
combination with bloated skin, altered consciousness, or loss of
consciousness, with no increase in body temperature. A victim of
hyponatremia should never be given fluid and should be treated by a
physician.
Proficient medical coverage should be readily available so that an athlete
encountering a test-related health problem can be very rapidly treated or
754
