handle on it (28). In Western literature the term kettlebell is used to
refer to a weighted implement consisting of a ball with a handle,
which is probably better termed a kettleball (28).
Along with the increasing interest in the use of kettlebell training
has been an increase in the amount of scientific inquiry into the
efficacy of using these implements with athletes and general
populations. The majority of the scientific evidence supporting the
use of kettlebells highlights their potential usefulness as a tool for
general physical or fitness development (38, 65). In these studies,
the most common exercise employed is the kettlebell swing, which
can be performed with either one or two hands (65, 87, 137). While
kettlebell swings appear to have a positive impact on cardiovascular
fitness, it is important to note that this activity does not offer the
same level of cardiovascular benefit as treadmill running or more
traditional aerobic exercise (65).
Currently, limited research explores the efficacy of kettlebell
training as a strength development tool. When used with clinical and
recreationally trained populations, kettlebell training has been
reported to increase muscular strength levels compared to no
training (68, 103). Additionally, when a battery of kettlebell exercises
(i.e., swings, goblet squats, accelerated swings) is performed across
a six-week training intervention, there appears to be an increase in
muscular strength and vertical jump performance in recreationally
trained men (103). However, these strength gains are significantly
lower than those typically seen with traditional weightlifting-based
training methods. Specifically, Otto and colleagues (103) reported
that six weeks of weightlifting training resulted in a 4% increase in
vertical jump performance, while kettlebell swings increased jumping
performance by only 0.8%. Additionally, back squat strength was
increased by 13.6% after six weeks of traditional weightlifting
training, while the kettlebell training resulted in only a 4.5% increase
(103).
Based on the contemporary body of scientific knowledge, it
appears that kettlebells are probably best used as general
1129
