amount of work being performed by athletes within a training session may vary.
For example, athletes who are 5 feet 6 inches (1.68 m) and 6 feet (1.83 m) in
stature who perform the back squat exercise with the same load and to the
same squat depth are performing different magnitudes of work based on the
displacement of the barbell. Within this scenario, the taller athlete must move
(displace) the external load a greater distance, which results in performing more
work than the shorter athlete. When monitoring training load, load displacement
can be accounted for by calculating volume–load displacement, which
multiplies volume–load by the displacement of the exercise. Although strongly
correlated to volume–load, researchers have indicated that volume–load
displacement may provide a better indicator of an athlete’s overall workload
totals (78). Thus, if strength and conditioning professionals have the time to
measure the displacements of exercises for their athletes (using appropriate
technology), greater insight into how athletes respond to various training phases
may be provided.
Note that the volume–load is not affected by the set and repetition scheme
(e.g., 15 sets of 1 repetition, 5 sets of 3 repetitions, 3 sets of 5 repetitions, or 1
set of 15 repetitions). Various set and repetition schemes affect the true
intensity value for resistance exercise and indicate the quality of work
performed. Instead of using time to calculate mechanical or metabolic power or
intensity, it is more practical to use a value that is proportional to time—namely,
rep-volume. The more repetitions performed, the longer the training session;
rest period lengths are an additional consideration and are not directly
accounted for. Dividing volume–load by rep-volume results in the average weight
lifted per repetition per workout session (162).
Relationship Between Load and Repetitions
The number of times an exercise can be performed (repetitions) is inversely
related to the load lifted; the heavier the load, the lower the number of
repetitions that can be performed. Therefore, focusing on one training goal
automatically implies the use of a certain load and repetition regimen (e.g.,
training for maximal muscular strength involves lifting very heavy loads [i.e.,
≥80% 1RM] for few repetitions [i.e., ≤6 repetitions]).
Before assigning training loads, the strength and conditioning professional
should understand this relationship between loads and repetitions. Load is
commonly described as either a certain percentage of a 1-repetition
maximum (1RM)—the greatest amount of weight that can be lifted with
proper technique for only 1 repetition—or the most weight lifted for a specified
number of repetitions, an xRM. For instance, if athletes can perform 10
repetitions with 60 kilograms in the back squat exercise, the 10RM is 60
1223
