Periodization Hierarchy
Ultimately, periodization is simply a means of organizing the planning of the
training process so that it is partitioned into specific time periods (table 22.2) (36,
37, 41). The multiyear training plan covers the most time but is the least detailed
plan within a periodized training structure. For example, it may involve the basic
progression of a college soccer player from her freshman to senior year and
contain key developmental goals that are targeted within each year of training.
This multiyear training structure is then subdivided into more detailed individual
annual training plans that are developed based on the athlete’s progression
through the various stages or benchmarks forecasted across the multiyear
training plan. In sports that have only one competitive season, such as American
football, an annual training plan would be represented as a macrocycle.
However, in a sport such as college track and field, the annual plan would be
divided into two macrocycles because of the indoor and outdoor seasons typical
of this college sport. Alternatively, if a high school athlete competes in American
football in the fall, basketball in the winter, and track and field in the spring, the
annual plan would be subdivided into three macrocycles. Typically, the macrocycle
lasts several months up to a year, depending on the sport or the number of sports
participated in within the year. Within each macrocycle are mesocycles, each
lasting several weeks to months, typically two to six weeks, with four weeks being
the most common duration. The number of mesocycles within each macrocycle
depends on the training targets and the length of the macrocycle within the
annual training plan. Each mesocycle is then broken down into individual
microcycles that last from several days to weeks; the most common duration is
one week (35, 38). Within each microcycle are training days that are further
subdivided into training sessions.
Periodization of training begins with general global training targets
set forth in the multiyear or annual training plan and becomes more
specific as the program is developed for the macro-, meso-, and
microcycles. For example, annual training plans set the general
pathway for a training year, while the other cycles provide the
structure that is used to guide the means, methods, and modes
used to create the training program that is used to guide the
athlete’s development toward the primary competitive targets.
TABLE 22.2 Periodization Cycles
Period
Duration
Description
1591
