powerlifters. Very little research has been done on the efficacy of
knee wraps. Detrimental side effects have been reported, however,
including skin damage and chondromalacia patellae, the wearing
down and roughening of the posterior surface of the patella (36).
Through a spring effect alone, heavy wraps around the knees added
an average of 25 pounds (110 N) to squat lifting force. The notion
that wraps work only by stabilizing the knee, lessening the athlete’s
fear of injury, or providing a kinesthetic cue is incorrect (36). The
wraps actually provide direct help in extending the knee. On the
basis of the lack of evidence that knee wraps prevent injury, athletes
should minimize their use. If used at all, knee wraps should be
limited to the sets with the heaviest loads.
Elbows and Wrists
The primary concerns with elbow and wrist injury involve overhead
exercises (10, 57). However, the risk with overhead lifting is quite
small in comparison to the common source of injury of these joints,
which includes participation in overhead sports such as throwing
events or the tennis serve (10, 57). Other examples of possible
injury are elbow dislocation, sometimes observed in gymnastics (39),
and overuse-related injuries such as traction apophysitis, sometimes
observed in diving, wrestling, and hockey (39). One of the primary
concerns is epiphyseal growth plate damage or overuse either in the
posterior aspect of the elbow or in the distal radius in young athletes
(39). The prevalence of elbow or wrist injury with weightlifting is
very sporadic and often referred to in the literature only through
case studies. One study indicated a triceps tendon tear in a middle-
aged competitive weightlifter (47) and in another study, a bilateral
distal biceps tendon rupture in a recreational weight trainer (50). A
study examining 245 competitive powerlifters found an extremely
low incidence of elbow and wrist injury (52). Only very limited data
have been presented to suggest possible distal radial epiphysis
fracture in adolescent weightlifters (11, 29). According to a study
that surveyed 500 experts in the field of sports medicine, most
168
