Exercise-Induced Responses
Men’s testosterone levels are generally highest in the morning and
gradually decrease throughout the day. However, this does not mean
that morning workouts are more effective than afternoon workouts.
The effectiveness of exercise depends more on the availability of
hormone receptors in both men and women, which is not directly
linked to the body’s circadian rhythm. Exercise can trigger increases
any time, with the overall response related to intensity, volume, and
rest periods between sets (17, 23, 44, 48, 81, 134). However, the
magnitude of the testosterone’s response is, as with all hormones,
dependent on where blood is sampled in the hormone’s circadian
cycle (e.g., testosterone is higher in the morning than in the late
afternoon), and thus, it is important to understand where a measure
of a hormone was made and if the study has a resting control for
the time of day to determine the magnitude above resting levels
accurately. Its circadian cycle is important for the interpretation of
the results of a study. Most studies have used the morning time
frames.
Testosterone dynamics in young males, particularly those under
18, are influenced significantly by puberty, affecting their responses
to exercise. Prepubescent boys produce minimal testosterone, which
limits exercise-induced hypertrophy. Adolescent males can enhance
serum testosterone levels through exercises that engage large
muscle groups like squats and deadlifts, using heavy resistance of
85% to 95% of their 1RM, and maintaining high exercise volume
with short rest intervals between sets, but the levels in women were
dramatically lower (figure 4.5; 133). It took two years of training in
young weightlifters (14-17 years) before an exercise-induced
testosterone effect was observed. While resistance training may not
raise resting testosterone levels, repeated exposure to resistance
training could help younger boys develop their hypothalamic-
pituitary-gonadal axis, enabling a more robust testosterone response
to acute resistance exercise (35).
256
