discovery instructional styles allow athletes to increase their focus on
the task-relevant cues related to task execution (75).
Feedback
Feedback plays a significant role in motor skill acquisition by
providing the athlete with information about the movement pattern
and the associated goal. This information can then be used to make
appropriate adjustments to achieve the desired movement pattern
and goal. Intrinsic feedback is feedback provided to the athlete by
the athlete from the senses—for example, sensory information about
missing a box during a squat box jump. Integration of the sensory
information allows the athlete to fine-tune and adjust the movement
pattern to produce the desired movement and associated task goal.
Augmented feedback is feedback provided to the athlete by either
an observer, such as a coach, or technology, such as video or
laboratory equipment. After the squat box jump, a coach can tell the
athlete that the hips’ countermovement was too slow, resulting in
missing the box.
The remainder of this section focuses on augmented feedback.
Augmented feedback can be broken down into knowledge of results
and knowledge of performance. Knowledge of results provides
the athlete with information about the execution of the task goal.
For example, with a T-drill, the coach can tell the athlete how quickly
he or she completed the drill. The athlete can also be given
normative information about how this time compares with others.
Both positive normative feedback and feedback without comparison
augment skill learning compared to negative normative feedback
(34). Knowledge of performance feedback provides the athlete
with information about his or her movement pattern. This can be
delivered in the form of video analysis or through the use of
specialized laboratory equipment such as a force plate. In the
instance of the T-drill, the coach gives the athlete specific
information about the movement during the T-test such as body
position during changes of direction. When the task goal is a
529
