macronutrients, and time until the next meal (4). The type of protein
may also have an effect on satiety, though research has not fully
elucidated which proteins may have the greatest impact (16, 101).
Protein also has the greatest thermic effect of feeding—more
calories are burned during the digestion of protein as compared to
carbohydrate or fat. Finally, higher protein diets help spare muscle
loss while a person is on a reduced-calorie diet (93, 132).
The amino acids in protein are used for growth (including muscle
growth) and for repairing tissue, synthesizing enzymes and
hormones, and repairing and making new cells. Though adults in a
general fitness program can likely meet their protein requirements
by consuming 0.8 to 1.0 gram of protein per kilogram body weight
per day, athletes and those who exercise intensely require more
protein (76). Traditionally, aerobic endurance athletes have placed
less of a priority on protein in comparison to carbohydrate; however,
adequate protein intake and timing are crucial for optimal
performance. Protein recommendations for aerobic endurance
athletes are 1.2 to 2.0 grams of protein per kilogram body weight
per day (167). For building muscle mass and for maintaining muscle
mass through a positive muscle protein balance, an overall daily
protein intake in the range of 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day is ideal (76). Athletes who are on a
reduced-calorie diet may need more protein per day to preserve
muscle tissue during weight loss (76).
In addition to eating the right amount of protein per day, research
supports the idea of athletes consuming sufficient protein as soon as
possible after exercise, when muscle tissue is most receptive to
amino acids in order to maximize muscle growth (76). In fact, after
exercise, both muscle protein synthesis and breakdown are
increased, though net protein balance is negative when the exercise
is done in a fasted state (127). Protein consumed after exercise
increases muscle protein synthesis, and muscles remain sensitive to
protein ingestion for at least 24 hours following a resistance training
bout (114). Reviews surrounding postexercise protein ingestion have
554
