Precompetition, During-Event, and
Postcompetition Nutrition
Athletes’ dietary practices over time will influence their overall health and
performance. Additionally, what athletes eat before and during competition can
have both physiological and psychological effects on performance, while their
postcompetition meal affects recovery and may therefore influence how they
perform during their next bout of training or competition.
Precompetition Nutrition
The precompetition meal helps provide fluid to maintain adequate hydration,
carbohydrate to maximize blood glucose and stored glycogen levels, and protein
to reduce muscle soreness (7, 31). Glycogen is the main form of energy used
during high-intensity (>70% V̇ O2max) exercise; once these stores become
depleted, the athlete will experience muscular fatigue (60). Small quantities of
glycogen are stored in liver and muscle, totaling approximately 15 grams of
glycogen per kilogram body weight (3). For example, an 80 kilogram (176 lb)
man can store approximately 1,200 grams of glycogen. Glycogen stored in the
liver is used for the whole body, while glycogen stored in muscle tissue is used
by muscle (60).
Despite the vital roles that both hydration and glycogen play in athletic
performance, studies examining the importance of the precompetition meal and
its effect on performance are equivocal due to differences in study subjects and
methods used. Some show that a high-carbohydrate preexercise meal enhances
aerobic time to exhaustion (29, 98) as well as anaerobic performance in
adolescent males (75), while no effect on time trial performance has been
reported in the literature (105). Despite these differences and the fact that
studies simulating performance cannot take into account several factors that
distinguish the competitive environment from a lab setting, such as
precompetition nerves, temperature, humidity, and altitude, athletes can adapt
general precompetition guidelines based on the literature to fit their own unique
needs and the competitive environment they are in. Importantly, an
individualized precompetition meal should be consumed.
All precompetition meals should take timing, meal and fluid composition,
event or sport, and individual athlete preferences into account. In order to
minimize the potential for stomach upset, smaller quantities of fluids and food
should be consumed when the precompetition meal is consumed closer in
temporal proximity to competition. Precompetition foods and beverages should
be familiar to the athlete (i.e., tried in practice), low in fat and fiber so that they
615
