and muscle tension due to feedback mechanisms that link the
respiratory and cardiac control centers in the brain stem. The
relatively deep inspiration, followed by a controlled expiration, alters
autonomic 
nervous 
system 
(ANS) 
balance 
to 
emphasize
parasympathetic neural activity and vagal tone (44). The
parasympathetic branch of the ANS promotes the opposite effect of
the sympathetic-mediated fight-or-flight response. Thus, rhythmic
breathing can decrease neural stimulation of both the skeletal
muscles and organs (e.g., heart, lungs, liver), resulting in a sense of
deep relaxation.
Diaphragmatic breathing requires that attention be directed to the
abdominal region. It is best to get familiar with this starting from a
standing position so that breathing is not inhibited. The athlete
should let the arms hang loosely and concentrate on relaxing,
particularly in the neck and shoulder region, by first taking a couple
of deep breaths. Next, the athlete should relax the abdominal
muscles so that they appear flaccid. The initiation of each breath
should occur simultaneously with the relaxed protrusion of the
abdomen; placing a hand on the abdomen gives feedback to ensure
that the abdomen protrudes with the initiation of each breath. With
each breath the abdomen should become naturally distended. When
this portion of the technique is performed properly, the diaphragm (a
muscle at the base of the lungs) contracts and drops, allowing a
deeper breath to occur. This is the first stage of taking a maximal
inhalation. The entire process of inhalation takes place in three
different areas and stages: the lower abdomen, the mid-chest, and
finally the upper chest. Diaphragmatic breathing can be combined
with more dynamic muscular relaxation techniques like progressive
muscular relaxation and autogenic training.
Progressive Muscular Relaxation
To achieve an appropriate level of cognitive and somatic activation
before performance, athletes may employ progressive muscle
relaxation (PMR) (28). Progressive muscle relaxation is a
491
