factors for cardiovascular disease; however, it is not clear which is
responsible—ALA, the other compounds in these nutrient-rich foods,
or a combination of the two (43). In addition to its physiological
functions, fat is important because it is responsible for the
characteristic flavor, aroma, and texture of many foods. Generally,
most dietary fats and oils are a mix of all three types of fatty acids,
with one type predominating. Soy, corn, sunflower, and safflower oils
are relatively high in polyunsaturated fatty acids; olive, peanut, and
canola oils are high in monounsaturated fatty acids; and most animal
fats and tropical oils (e.g., coconut, palm kernel) are relatively high
in saturated fatty acids. See table 10.11 for fat content of common
foods.
When stored in the human body, fat serves many functions.
Energy is stored primarily as adipose tissue in humans, but small
amounts are also found in skeletal muscle, especially in aerobically
trained athletes (142). Body fat insulates and protects organs,
regulates hormones, and carries and stores the fat-soluble vitamins
A, D, E, and K.
Relationship With Cholesterol
Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that is an important
structural and functional component of all cell membranes.
Additionally, cholesterol is used for the production of bile salts,
vitamin D, and several hormones, including the sex hormones
(estrogen, androgen, and progesterone) as well as cortisol. Though
cholesterol has many essential functions in the body, high levels of
cholesterol may lead to atherosclerosis, hardening of the arteries
due to plaque buildup on artery walls, which narrows the area within
arteries through which blood can pass. Therefore, having high levels
of blood cholesterol is a risk factor for heart disease and stroke.
High levels of total cholesterol, low-density lipoproteins
(LDL), and triglycerides are all associated with increased risk of
heart disease. Low-density lipoprotein is further divided into
subfractions based on particle size. Smaller, more dense particles,
568
