given to preexisting medical ailments, prior training history, and
nutritional status before the beginning of a resistance training
program that may predispose seniors to increased risk of exercise-
induced injury or illness. Even though older populations retain the
capacity to adapt to increased levels of physical activity, safe and
effective exercise guidelines must be followed.
Before participation in an exercise program, seniors should
complete a medical history and risk factor questionnaire (76).
Potential limitations and possible restrictions for physical activity can
be ascertained from this information. In some cases, physician
clearance is required before the initiation of a moderate or vigorous
exercise program (76)—for example, in cardiac rehabilitation
patients or cancer survivors. Any questions regarding a participant’s
medical 
status 
(e.g., 
heart 
disease, 
hypertension, 
arthritis,
osteoporosis, or diabetes mellitus) should be answered by a health
professional. After this information has been obtained, a preprogram
evaluation to document baseline measurements and assess
responses to specific exercise modalities should be performed.
Although a treadmill exercise test is often used to evaluate
cardiovascular responses to aerobic exercise, a strength test
(preferably on the equipment used in training) should be performed
to assess responses to resistance exercise and aid in the exercise
prescription. Of note, while resistance machines may be used in the
early stages of a training program with older adults due to balance
and flexibility limitations, where appropriate, older adults should
sensibly incorporate free weight, multijoint resistance training
exercises into the program to provide a greater overall training
stimulus and place a greater demand on postural stability. Various
methods of assessing muscular strength, including repetition
maximum testing, can be reliably used in senior populations,
provided that appropriate testing guidelines are followed (76).
Strength and conditioning professionals should be aware of the
potential risks of breath holding (Valsalva maneuver) for older adults
(76). While the Valsalva maneuver assists in stabilizing the trunk and
428
