When a motor neuron activates a muscle fiber, a cascade of events
occur that stimulate the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release calcium
ions into the myofibrils of the muscle fiber. Secreted calcium ions
bind with a high affinity to the troponin protein, which exists at
regular intervals along the actin filament (figure 1.6). This calcium-
troponin interaction causes a shift in another protein termed
tropomyosin, which is bound to troponin and spans the length of
the actin filament. These events expose the myosin binding site on
actin and enable the myosin head to attach to the actin filament to
form an actin-myosin crossbridge (4). It is important to understand
that the amount of force produced by any given muscle is directly
related to the number of actin-myosin crossbridges formed within
the muscle fibers of that muscle (4). Thus, activities that require a
high force output necessitate the activation (or recruitment) of most
motor neurons and the muscle fibers they innervate to achieve the
maximal amount of actin-myosin crossbridge formation.
The number of actin-myosin crossbridges formed within
the muscle fibers of a given muscle at any instant in
time dictates the force production of the muscle.
Contraction Phase
The contraction phase involves the mechanical movement (or
pivoting) of the myosin head from the resting phase when the actin-
myosin crossbridge is formed, which leads to the pulling of the
associated actin filament to the center of the sarcomere. Critically,
this mechanical movement is catalyzed from the biochemical energy
provided by the hydrolysis (or breakdown) of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) by the myosin adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase)
enzyme present on the myosin head. The products of ATP hydrolysis
include adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate (Pi),
metabolites that also serve critical roles in the contraction process.
While the different phases of the contraction phase are relatively
complex, they can be summarized as follows:
54
