already possessing high levels of BMD. These changes in BMD are
independent of reproductive hormonal status if the stimulus is
sufficient (161).
Exercise selection is critical when one is trying to elicit maximal
osteogenic stimuli (factors that stimulate new bone formation). In
essence, exercises should involve multiple joints, should direct the
force vectors primarily through the spine and hip (i.e., structural
exercises), and should apply external loads heavier than those with
single-joint assistance exercises. Cussler and colleagues (34) showed
a positive linear relationship between the amounts of weight lifted
over the course of a training year and associated increases in BMD.
In addition, the findings of this research highlighted the importance
of exercise specificity in that the squat, compared to seated leg
press, was more effective for increasing BMD in the trochanter of the
femur (34). The use of single-joint, machine-based exercises should
be limited, because these exercises isolate a single muscle group by
using equipment as support to stabilize the body rather than
promoting skeletal support. Therefore, exercises such as the back
squat, power clean, deadlift, snatch, and push jerk (for the axial
skeleton and lower body) and the shoulder press (for the upper
body) are recommended as more effective methods for increasing
bone strength when indicated.
Because bone responds favorably to mechanical forces, the
principle of progressive overload—progressively placing greater
than normal demands on the exercising musculature—applies when
one is training to increase bone mass (66, 170). Although the
maximal strength of bone is maintained well above the voluntary
force capabilities of the associated musculature, bone responds to
higher forces (e.g., 1RM to 10RM loads) that are repetitively applied
over time. The adaptive response of bone ensures that forces do not
exceed a critical level that increases the risk of stress fractures
(microfractures in bone due to structural fatigue). Support for
progressive overload comes from studies that have compared BMD
of various groups of athletes to that of nonathletes (47). In fact,
314
