  19   YMCA BENCH PRESS TEST
Equipment
A barbell, weight plates, two safety locks, and enough total weight to assemble an 80-pound
(36 kg) or a 35-pound (16 kg) load (including safety locks)
Flat bench press bench (preferably with an upright rack to hold the barbell)
Metronome
Personnel
One spotter/recorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in proper technique for the flat barbell bench press as described in chapter
16.
2. Allow the athlete to perform a specific warm-up of 5 to 10 repetitions with a light to moderate
load.
3. The spotter/recorder stands at the head end of the bench throughout the test to help raise the
bar on a failed attempt and to help the athlete place the bar back on the rack.
4. Set the resistance at 80 pounds (36 kg) for males and 35 pounds (16 kg) for females.
5. Set the metronome cadence at 60 beats/min to establish a rate of 30 repetitions per minute
(one beat up, one beat down).
6. The athlete grips the bar at shoulder-width, lifts the bar off the rack, and extends the elbows.
Then, in time with the metronome, the athlete repeatedly lowers the bar to the chest and
raises it up again to full elbow extension, until the athlete can no longer keep up with the
metronome. The movement should be smooth and controlled, with the bar reaching its highest
and lowest position with each beat of the metronome.
Note: Normative data for the YMCA bench press test are presented in table 14.19 near the end of
the chapter.
Aerobic Capacity
  20   1.5-MILE (2.4 KM) RUN
Equipment
Stopwatch
Quarter-mile running track or measured and marked 1.5-mile (2.4 km) flat course with a good
running surface
Personnel
One tester to call off each athlete’s time, one recorder
Procedure
1. Have each athlete warm up and stretch before the test.
2. Each athlete should be recognizable to the scorer at the finish line. If that is not possible,
numbers should be pinned to the athletes’ shirts.
3. At the start, all athletes line up behind the starting line.
4. Instruct the athletes to complete the run as quickly as possible at a steady pace that they can
barely maintain over the distance. (Note: Some athletes may have limited experience at pacing
799
