should first establish an athlete’s protein intake and then add
carbohydrate and fats as determined by total calorie needs (95).
Concerns About the RDA for Protein
Controversy surrounds the RDA for protein since some scientists
suggest that adults should consume more than the RDA for bone
health (59), weight management, and building and repairing muscle
(122, 123). In addition, research suggests that higher-protein,
lower-carbohydrate 
diets 
can 
favorably 
affect 
blood 
lipids,
particularly in obese individuals, and therefore also decrease some of
the risk factors for cardiovascular disease and metabolic syndrome
(94).
Protein is a building block for strong bones, contributing to 50%
of bone volume and 33% of bone mass (96). Protein’s effect on
bone may be due, in part, to its influence on insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1), which is produced in the liver and promotes bone
and muscle formation (144). Though research suggests that
supplemental, but not dietary, protein increases calcium losses
through urine, in healthy individuals consuming 0.7 to 2.1 grams of
protein per kilogram body weight, both urinary calcium excretion and
intestinal calcium absorption increase (88). In fact, low dietary
protein intake (0.7 g protein per kg body weight per day) suppresses
intestinal calcium absorption (87). The effects of protein on bone
health have been the center of some controversy, but experimental
studies generally indicate that dietary protein supports bone health
when consumed as part of a high-quality whole-food diet containing
adequate calcium. However, future high-quality experimental studies
are necessary to fully understand the interactive effects of dietary
protein and diet quality on bone health (37).
Protein also plays a multifaceted role in weight management.
First, it promotes satiety in a dose-dependent manner: Greater
amounts of protein lead to a greater increase in satiety (48).
However, the satiating effect of protein also depends on the timing
of protein intake, form (solid vs. liquid), concurrent intake of other
553
