requirement for participation in a youth resistance training program,
children should have the emotional maturity to receive and follow
directions and should want to try this type of activity (139, 215). A
pretraining medical examination is not mandatory for apparently
healthy children; however, all participants should be screened for
any injury or illness that may limit or prevent safe participation in a
resistance training program (215). The goals of youth resistance
training programs should not be limited to increasing muscular
strength but should also include teaching children about their
bodies, promoting an interest in physical activity, teaching weight
room etiquette, and having fun. It seems likely that children who
enjoy participating in physical activities and sport are more likely to
be active later in life (220).
Two important areas of concern in the development of youth
resistance training programs are the quality of instruction and rate of
progression. Strength and conditioning professionals must have a
thorough understanding of youth resistance training guidelines, an
ability and willingness to demonstrate proper exercise technique,
and the requisite pedagogical skills to speak with children at a level
they understand (59, 137, 139). Professionals should deemphasize
competition between participants and focus on proper technique
instead of the amount of weight lifted. Differentiating training
sessions can enable practitioners to meet the needs of individual
children even when delivering sessions to groups of young athletes.
Designing and delivering training programs that pursue a common
goal (i.e., movement skill and muscular strength development) but
have differentiating levels (e.g., technical difficulty, intensity, range
of motion, movement speed) can also be a useful approach to allow
for individualization based on the athletes’ ability. While some form
of variation needs to be applied to achieve ongoing adaptation, this
should be applied in a logical and progressive manner, and it is
important to keep the program fresh and challenging. Children
should be given an opportunity to develop proper form and
technique, and there should be a balance between repeated
413
