during weight bearing is likely essential to maintain tissue viability
(148).
Aerobic exercise, particularly running, has received a lot of
research attention due not only to the health benefits it can provide
but also because of suggestions that habitual running can have a
negative impact on joints like the knees and hips, increasing the risk
of cartilage damage and osteoarthritis. While mixed or inconclusive
findings on the impact of running on knee health have been reported
(154), a study evaluating thousands of non-elite male and female
runners across the life span (ages from 12 to over 50) reported that
running did not increase the odds of knee pain or symptomatic knee
osteoarthritis (97). Similarly, a study has reported that running does
not increase the risk of symptomatic knee osteoarthritis compared to
non-running activities (98). In individuals without preexisting
osteoarthritis, running does not appear to harm the knees (98).
Moreover, some research suggests that running may even offer
protection against general knee pain (29). This protection may be
associated with the improved periarticular strength, not to mention
proprioception that comes with the running motion (98).
In studies of elite aerobic endurance-trained athletes, the results
are similar to those of lesser-trained runners. For example, in a
study of over 2,000 former elite athletes, it was found that those
from a power and mixed-sports background (e.g., soccer, basketball,
track and field) had an increased rate of hospital admissions for
premature osteoarthritis compared to aerobic endurance athletes
(e.g., long-distance runners), who also experienced admissions but
at a notably older age (90). A similar finding was reported in another
study of various former athletes including elite male aerobic
endurance and track and field athletes, where it was found that
aerobic endurance athletes reported fewer hip issues than control
subjects (78). It has been suggested that aerobic endurance athletes
may benefit from having a lower body mass index, which assists in
preventing osteoarthritis, along with having a more physically active
lifestyle, which may assist with a higher-than-average life
351
