methods that prepare the athlete for later performance gains (88,
89, 106, 126). The short-term effect is decrements in performance,
but recovery can be attained within days or weeks and can result in
a supercompensation effect. As such, and although stressful to the
athlete, functional overreaching (FOR) can be beneficial
provided appropriate recovery is allowed. It should be noted that
functional overreaching is a commonly used training strategy by
many successful coaches. Figure 24.1 on page 778 illustrates how
functional overreaching can fit into the GAS paradigm.
Nonfunctional Overreaching
On the other hand, nonfunctional overreaching (NFOR) is
somewhat similar to functional overreaching with two very important
differences. First, the short-term accumulated fatigue is greater, and,
second, the recovery takes longer (88, 89, 126). In the case of
NFOR, the individual does not experience any supercompensation
and is only able to return to his or her baseline performance levels
(see figure 24.1 on page 778) (88, 89, 93, 108, 125, 126). As the
name implies, this type of training does not serve any useful function
since no performance benefits result, and the athlete has been
unnecessarily stressed.
Overtraining and Overreaching Share
Properties With Other Conditions
A number of other problematic conditions share symptoms and characteristics with
OT and OTS. For example, similarities between OT and the OTS with clinical
depression (4, 5), post-traumatic stress disorder (6), and other relevant
psychological conditions (53) have been noted.
Additionally, many characteristics of relative energy deficiency syndrome
(RED-S), formerly known as the female athlete triad, are similar to symptoms
often found in OTS (122). Although the root causes of each of these illnesses or
diseases may be different from OT and OTS, they can each certainly contribute to
an OTS. Both RED-S and OTS can be interrelated since many causes and
symptoms of each condition contribute to the other. Therefore, when the presence
of RED-S is suspected, it is important to clearly discern how overtraining may be
contributing to this problem. To adequately address the serious condition of RED-S,
1693
