hence neuromuscular stimulus experienced with free weights
compared to machine-based or single-joint exercises (17). For those
studies involving running, the benefit may also be related to the
greater transference from the resistance training environment to the
running movement due to the biomechanical similarity between the
two (17). High-velocity movements including plyometric exercises
such as hops, bounds, jumps, drop jumps, and squat jumps have
shown to have a positive impact on aerobic endurance performance
measures (31, 38). For more information, refer to chapters 18 and
19 for program design and technique details.
Training Intensity and Frequency
A common finding of concurrent training research for improving
aerobic endurance performance is the use of heavy resistance
training or plyometric training by athletes two or three times per
week (10, 17) or a combination of both (4, 31, 38). However, to
reduce the impact of a resistance training session on a subsequent
aerobic endurance training session (i.e., residual fatigue, muscle
soreness, and physiological disturbance), the volume should be
reduced to limit the potential carryover of fatigue caused by the
resistance training session (35). That is, keep the loads high (e.g.,
≥90% of 1RM or ≤4RM) (38) but the weekly volume low (31). It is
also worth noting that strength developed during a preparatory
phase has been found to be maintained for up to 12 weeks with just
one resistance training session per week thereafter (111), thus
allowing athletes to maintain strength gains throughout subsequent
training phases with minimal time commitment.
Recovery Time Between Concurrent Training Sessions
The level of recovery during a concurrent training program is
influenced not only by the intensity, frequency, and duration of the
individual training sessions but also the mode of aerobic endurance
training (e.g., running vs. cycling) and type of resistance training
performed (e.g., velocity of movement) (35). The shorter the
1555
