to make weight and attempt to rehydrate before competition, though short time
periods between weighing and competing may mean starting competition in a
dehydrated state, leading to poor performance and health risks.
Aerobic Endurance Events
After prolonged aerobic endurance events, it is important to replenish
carbohydrate stores before the next training session or competition (whichever
comes first) and to aid in immune system function and consume enough protein
to build and repair muscle. Glycogen synthesis occurs in two distinct phases. The
first phase is independent of insulin and lasts 30 to 60 minutes, and glycogen
synthesis occurs rapidly. The second phase lasts several hours, and glycogen
synthesis occurs at a much slower pace. Glycogen synthesis occurs at a rapid
rate when large amounts of carbohydrate, 1.0 to 1.85 grams per kilogram body
weight per hour, are consumed immediately after exercise or competition and at
regular intervals every 15 to 60 minutes thereafter for up to 5 hours (61). For
some athletes, though, it may be difficult to ingest carbohydrate quantities at the
upper end of that range. Though athletes may be able to fully replenish their
glycogen stores right away or over the course of a 24-hour period after a long
training session, this is not necessarily the case after competition. Strenuous
aerobic endurance events that result in measurable muscle damage, such as the
marathon, lead to delayed glycogen resynthesis even if an athlete consumes a
higher-carbohydrate diet, possibly due to either metabolic disturbance or
mechanical damage to muscle cells (12, 124).
Though athletes are often told that they need to eat carbohydrate
immediately after they finish competing, research shows that this is not always
necessary; they may be able to wait 2 hours after finishing a glycogen-depleting
event before eating carbohydrate, although this may not necessarily be optimal.
In a study examining the rate of glycogen resynthesis, five high-glycemic meals
were given to athletes over the course of a 24-hour period after a 2-hour-long
glycogen-depleting bout of cycling. One group received the first three meals over
the 4-hour period after exercise, while the second group received the first three
meals at regular 2-hour intervals starting 2 hours after they finished over the
first 6 hours after exercise. The rate of glycogen resynthesis was the same
between groups after 8 hours and after 24 hours (103). Therefore, athletes who
have more than 24 hours to recover can likely wait before eating after exercise
and replace their glycogen over the 24-hour time period after exercise as long as
they consume an adequate amount of carbohydrate, though they may not
receive the same systemic recovery benefits beyond glycogen replenishment.
However, athletes who train two or three times a day or have less than 24 hours
to recover may want to consider eating or drinking a high-carbohydrate meal
631
