maximal oxygen uptake (1). At that point, stroke volume begins to
plateau. Sedentary college-aged men have maximal stroke volumes
averaging between 100 and 120 mL of blood per beat; maximal
stroke volumes for college-aged women are approximately 25% less,
due to a smaller average body size as well as a smaller heart muscle
(32). The effect of training on the responses to exercise is marked,
and we see an increase in maximal stroke volume for college-aged
men up to 150 to 160 mL per beat and approximately 100 to 110 for
college-aged women (32).
Stroke Volume
Two physiological mechanisms are responsible for the regulation of
stroke volume. The first is a result of the end-diastolic volume,
the volume of blood available to be pumped by the left ventricle at
the end of the filling phase, or diastole. The second is due to the
action of catecholamines, including epinephrine and norepinephrine,
which are hormones of the sympathetic nervous system that
produce a more forceful ventricular contraction and greater systolic
emptying of the heart.
At the onset of exercise, or even with the anticipation of exercise,
sympathetic stimulation increases myocardial contractility and
consequently increases stroke volume (14, 27). With prolonged
aerobic exercise, the amount of blood returning to the heart (also
called venous return) is increased due to a combination of
venoconstriction (induced via increased sympathetic nervous system
activation) (2), the skeletal muscle pump (muscular contractions
combine with one-way venous valves to “push” more blood to the
heart during exercise (16), and the respiratory pump (increased
respiratory frequency and tidal volume) (28). These responses result
in pressure alterations on the chambers of the heart and thoracic
vena cava, which promote increased venous return (28), and thus
end-diastolic volume is significantly increased. With the increased
volume, the myocardial fibers become more stretched than at rest,
resulting in a more forceful contraction, an increase in force of
84
