preparticipation examinations, on-field emergency care, injury and
illness evaluation and diagnosis, and referral to other health care
professionals as needed (67). Although not responsible for daily
rehabilitation, the team physician most often makes the final
determination of an athlete’s readiness for return to competition (31,
67). Another important role of the team physician is the prescription
of medications as needed, including anti-inflammatory, pain, and
cold and flu medications.
The person typically responsible for the day-to-day physical health
of the athlete is the athletic trainer or athletic therapist. In the
United States, an athletic trainer is certified by the National Athletic
Trainers’ Association Board of Certification as a Certified Athletic
Trainer (ATC). The athletic trainer works under the supervision of the
team physician and is employed primarily by secondary schools,
colleges, or professional teams but may also work in an outpatient
physical therapy clinic. Primary responsibilities of this individual
include management and rehabilitation of injuries resulting from
physical activity and prevention of injuries through the prescription
of sport-specific exercise and the application of prophylactic
equipment (e.g., tape and braces). Specifically, the athletic trainer
evaluates injuries, provides the injured athlete with therapeutic
exercise to hasten the rehabilitation process, treats injuries with
therapeutic modalities, and serves as an administrator for the allied
health team (15). Because the athletic trainer has a significant
amount of contact with the athlete, he or she plays a key role in
promoting communication between members of the allied health
team, the coach, and the athlete (15).
A physical therapist (or physiotherapist) with specialization
in orthopedics or sport physical therapy can play a valuable role in
reducing pain and restoring function to the injured athlete. Although
physical therapists are typically based in outpatient physical therapy
clinics, many collegiate and professional teams now directly employ
physical therapists as members of the allied health staff. A physical
therapist may help develop specific treatment strategies or manage
1633
