A study of 21 elite athletes with heavy training loads, who were randomized to
receive nutrition counseling or to eat ad libitum, showed that over the course of
the 8- to 12-week weight gain period, the group receiving dietary counseling had
greater total and lean body mass gains during the intervention and after 12
months; this means that the group receiving nutrition counseling continued to
benefit from the nutrition guidance for several months after counseling ended
(41).
Weight (Fat) Loss
Athletes participating in a variety of sports may need to lose body fat to improve
aspects of performance such as speed or aerobic endurance. Plus, regulating
body weight may give certain athletes a mental advantage going into
competition (108). Additionally, maintaining or making weight is a recurring
aspect of sports that include weight classes, weight limitations, or judging based
on appearance such as weightlifting, wrestling, boxing, lightweight crew, and
gymnastics.
Despite diet books on the bestseller lists, there is no ideal diet that works for
everyone. Instead, studies show that a variety of types of diets, including low-
carbohydrate and low-fat diets, result in weight loss as long as the people
following them are consuming fewer calories than needed to maintain weight.
Additionally, there appears to be no difference between the amount of weight
loss on a low-carbohydrate as compared to a low-fat (and therefore higher-
carbohydrate) diet (19, 39). Total calorie intake and dietary adherence, the
ability to stick with a diet over time, are the two most important factors that
predict successful weight loss. However, a good portion of weight loss during
dieting may come from muscle (144). Further, because muscle protein synthesis
is an energy-expensive process, during times of dieting caloric restriction may
decrease muscle protein synthesis. Athletes who want to maintain muscle and
lose body fat while dieting should consume about 1.8 to 2.7 grams protein per
kilogram body weight per day (or approximately 2.3-3.1 g protein per kilogram
fat-free mass per day) in addition to maintaining a moderate energy deficit of
approximately 500 calories per day (91).
There is no one ideal diet. Instead, athletes need to choose a
dietary approach based on whether it is safe for them, contains
enough protein to meet their needs, and fits their lifestyle so that
they can easily adhere to it.
To be sustainable in the long term, diets should be individualized; be easy to
adhere to; and take into account lifestyle habits, medical history (including
645
