The thigh forcefully retracts during the late swing to enable foot contact
behind the center of mass, enhancing production and direction (more
horizontal) of GRFs early in ground contact.
The foot and ankle maintain optimal stiffness. A stable foot position during
the early stance helps provide the foundation for the hip extensors to
contribute more effectively to forward propulsion while enabling storage and
release of elastic energy at the ankle.
Maximum Velocity
Posture
Slight forward lean
Head in neutral position looking toward intended direction of travel
High neutral pelvis position
Arms
Arm action mirrors the contralateral limb (i.e., when the touchdown leg is in
its longest position the opposite arm will be in its most open position to
balance the body).
The hand is driven hard down below the waist on the downstroke and
returns to the height of the athlete’s chin with a more acute angle at the
elbow (approximately 90 degrees on the return).
Arms should not cross the midline of the body.
Legs
With a slight flex of the knee at takeoff, the hip is in a hyperextended
position and the ankle is plantar flexed.
After toe-off, the knee should flex and the ankle dorsiflex (passive folding)
as the thigh flexes forward at the hip to a high knee position. A high heel
recovery whereby the foot steps over the opposite knee should be observed.
With the knee at its highest point (front-side catch), the tibia should be in a
high forward position, providing space for rearward acceleration of the thigh
to help generate larger initial GRFs during support.
The foot should travel down and back (negative foot speed before
touchdown).
The foot should touch down close to underneath the center of mass (will be
slightly in front). At touchdown the opposite knee should be beside or
slightly in front of the knee of the touchdown leg.
During support, knee and ankle flexion should be minimal.
In the late stance (back-side catch), early hip flexor activation helps avoid
prolonged ground contact and decelerates the extending limb, preventing
lower leg recovery behind the body after toe-off (too much back-side
1423
