underlying muscle (131). Surface EMG is often more effective for
monitoring superficial muscle, because it is unable to detect deeper
muscle activity. Also, the more body fat an individual has, the
weaker the EMG signal will be because body fat acts as a low-pass
filter. In comparison, with intramuscular EMG, the skin surface is
numbed, and a needle electrode, or a needle containing two fine-
wire electrodes, is inserted through the skin and positioned into the
belly of the muscle itself. Fine-wire electrodes emphasize a specificity
of assessment in that they are located in a muscle of interest and
accurately record localized motor unit action potentials (75). Because
of its invasiveness, intramuscular EMG is primarily adopted in
research settings or under clinical conditions. While it is often
difficult to determine the specific underpinning mechanism(s) (i.e.,
increased recruitment, discharge rate, or synchronization; Golgi
tendon organ inhibition) affecting EMG output, an increase in EMG
signal indicates greater neuromuscular activity.
An important consideration when examining the neuromuscular
system is an individual’s training status. Neural adaptations
(improved motor learning and coordination) predominate in the early
phase of training without substantial concomitant increases in
muscle hypertrophy (61). It appears that as an individual’s training
status 
advances, 
an 
interplay 
exists 
between 
neural 
and
hypertrophic mechanisms that contribute to further gains in strength
and power.
Sale reported that dramatic increases in neural adaptation take
place in the early part of a training program (6-10 weeks) (140). As
the duration of training increases (>10 weeks), when muscle
hypertrophy becomes more observable, it is these structural changes
that contribute to strength and power gains more than neural
adaptations (40c). Eventually, muscle hypertrophy plateaus as an
accommodation to the training load occurs. However, at that time, if
an athlete incorporates new variation or progressive overload into
the training plan, neural adaptations will once again contribute to
the performance improvements by acting to tolerate the new
295
