Variable
Factor
Interpretation
Temporal
constraints
Temporal or time constraints can be administered (i.e.,
athlete has 5 s to achieve the objective) to maintain
quality and intensity (and often to replicate the reduced
temporal constraints associated in random sports). Work-
to-rest ratios can be manipulated for energy system
development and to represent peak demands of sports.
Rules and
conditions
Practitioners can be creative and vary the rules (i.e., one-
hand or two-hand tags) and put constraints on the
attackers or defenders to create variation (i.e., only two
evasive actions can be performed before committing to a
specific direction within the drill).
Environment and
surfaces
To increase game representativeness, drills should be
performed on the sport-specific surface. However, certain
sports may play on different surfaces (i.e., grass and
artificial turf) with different hardness and frictional
properties, and thus these should be considered.
Generic to sport-
specific stimulus
(developing
representative
learning
environments)
Generic stimuli and sources of information can be used
such as auditory commands, generic visual commands,
and stimuli such as flashing lights, arrows, and coach- or
player-dictated directional commands to increase
cognitive loading and increase mechanical loading in a
controlled environment. Typically, the timing of stimuli
can be controlled as well using specific equipment.
However, to increase game representativeness, develop
perceptual-cognitive speed, knowledge of situations,
memory recall, and anticipation, sport-specific stimuli
(i.e., multiple attackers or defenders, inclusion of sport-
specific implements and scenarios) can be included to
develop movement solutions and transfer to sporting
performance. These drills can be developed
collaboratively with the skills coach for simultaneous
technical and tactical development.
Task complexity
and cognitive
loading
To challenge more advanced athletes and to ensure
athletes are prepared for the chaotic demands of sport
when returning to sports, drills can begin with relatively
simple closed and open drills with one or two stimuli and
sources of information, before progressing to more
chaotic open drills of increased game representativeness
with various sources of stimuli and information (i.e.,
Note: 
COD 
= 
change 
of
direction.
1461
