FIGURE 14.1 Load–velocity profiling.
Reprinted by permission from H.G. Banyard, K. Nosaka, and G.G. Haff, “Reliability and Validity of the Load-Velocity Relationship to Predict the 1RM Back Squat,” The
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 31, no. 7 (2017): 1897-1904.
Agility
Agility traditionally has been considered the ability to stop, start, and change the direction of the
whole body rapidly (134, 143). Agility consists of two main components: speed in changing
direction and cognitive factors (134). The definition of agility has been revised to take into account
the perceptual qualities, and it is now considered “a rapid, whole-body, change of direction or
speed in response to a sports-specific stimulus” (134, 143). Agility testing therefore involves tests
of change of direction with a cognitive component, such an anticipation and reaction. Tests such as
the T-test, the 5-0-5 test, the 5-10-5 test (also known as the pro agility test), and the L-drill (also
known as the 3-cone drill) are used to assess change of direction.
Speed
Speed is movement distance per unit of time and is typically quantified as the time taken to cover
a fixed distance. The time taken to sprint from a stationary start over a short distance such as 10
yards or meters reflects acceleration, whereas longer sprints such as 40 yards (37 m) would
measure maximum speed (163). Tests of speed are not usually conducted over distances greater
than 100 meters (109 yd) because longer distances reflect anaerobic or aerobic capacity more than
absolute ability to move the body at maximal speed (103, 124, 163).
Electronic timing devices are becoming more accessible to strength and conditioning
professionals due to increased ease of use and lower prices. However, many tests of speed and
agility are administered using hand timing with a stopwatch, which can be a major source of
measurement error, especially if the tester is not sufficiently trained. Even under ideal conditions,
stopwatch-measured sprint times are up to 0.24 seconds faster than electronically measured times
because of the tester’s reaction-time delay in pressing the stopwatch button at the gun and the
tendency to anticipate and press the button early as the athlete approaches the finish line (45, 67,
125). Therefore, strength and conditioning professionals are encouraged to use electronic timing
devices for tests of speed and agility when they are available. It is also more informative to
measure split times, because this can provide the strength and conditioning professional with
insight into the speed and acceleration capacities of the athletes. For example, times for 10 yards
(9 m), 20 yards (18 m), and 40 yards (37 m) can be recorded and used to calculate split times and
maximal velocity. Finally, tests of speed and agility require proper footwear and a nonslip surface.
Athletic Motor Skill Competency
Developing movement skills that enable children and adolescents to move in an effective and
efficient manner during physical activity and sport is central to long-term athletic development. The
athletic motor skill competencies (AMSC), proposed by Lloyd and colleagues (90), presents
foundational movement skills that underpin athletic movements. The AMSC and examples of
associated movement screening exercises are presented in figure 14.2 and can be used to monitor
the development of young athletes (123). The use of the AMSC and other screening tools provide a
method for tracking athlete development with the use of various assessment tools that evaluate
movement patterns and other qualitative aspects of movement. As such, these types of tools are
best described as process-oriented assessments (150). Overall, the use of movement screening
information can be used by practitioners to identify strength, mobility, and neuromuscular deficits,
which can then guide programming decisions.
770
