Skeletal Musculature
The system of muscles that enables the skeleton to move is depicted
in figure 1.2. The connection point between bones is the joint, and
skeletal muscles are attached to bones at each of their ends.
Without this arrangement, movement could not occur.
Musculoskeletal Macrostructure and Microstructure
Each skeletal muscle contains muscle tissue made up of a variety of
cell types (with the most notable being muscle fibers), connective
tissue, nerves, blood vessels, and a plethora of cell types between
muscle fibers that serve different functions. Fibrous connective
tissue, or epimysium, covers the body’s more than 430 skeletal
muscles. The epimysium is contiguous with the tendons at the ends
of the muscle (figure 1.3). The tendon is attached to bone
periosteum, a specialized connective tissue covering all bones.
Notably, muscle contractions pull on tendons, and in turn, this moves
bones that are attached to the associated tendons. Limb muscles
have two attachments to bone, including proximal (closer to the
trunk) and distal (farther from the trunk) attachments. The two
attachments of trunk muscles are termed superior (closer to the
head) and inferior (closer to the feet).
Muscle cells, often called muscle fibers or myofibers, are long
(sometimes running the entire length of a muscle), cylindrical cells
50 to 100 μm in diameter (about the diameter of a human hair).
Muscle fibers have all their nuclei situated on the outer periphery of
the cell and have a striated appearance when viewed with a
microscope under low magnification. Under the epimysium the
muscle fibers are grouped in bundles (fasciculi) that may consist of
up to 150 fibers, with the bundles surrounded by connective tissue
called perimysium. Each muscle fiber is surrounded by connective
tissue called endomysium, which is encircled by and is contiguous
with the muscle fiber membrane, or sarcolemma (41). All the
connective tissue—epimysium, perimysium, and endomysium—is
contiguous with the tendon, so tension developed in a muscle cell is
43
