Construct Validity
Construct validity is the ability of a test to represent the
underlying construct (the theory developed to organize and explain
some aspects of existing knowledge and observations). Construct
validity refers to overall validity, or the extent to which the test
actually measures what it was designed to measure (24). Face
validity, content validity, and criterion validity, defined next, are
secondary to and provide evidence for construct validity. Within
construct validity, there are two important subtypes: convergent
validity and discriminant validity. Both are crucial in the
development and evaluation of measurement tools. Convergent
validity is evidenced by high positive correlations between results of
the test being assessed and those of the recognized measure of the
construct (the “gold standard”). A test may be preferable to the gold
standard if it exhibits convergent validity with the standard but is
less demanding in terms of time, equipment, expense, or expertise.
Convergent validity would be demonstrated if scores on the 1RM
back squat test and the isometric squat test (requiring force plate
technology) are highly correlated, indicating that both tests are
effectively measuring the same underlying construct (lower body
strength).
Discriminant validity is the ability of a test to distinguish between
two different constructs and is evidenced by a low correlation
between the results of the test and those of tests of a different
construct (2). Discriminant validity would be established if scores on
the 1RM back squat test do not show a correlation with V̇ O2max
scores, indicating that the squat test is specifically measuring
strength and not endurance (two different constructs).
Face Validity
Face validity is the appearance to the athlete and other casual
observers that the test measures what it is purported to measure. If
a test or test item has face validity, the athlete is more likely to
respond to it positively (1). The assessment of face validity is
737
