increasing flexibility. PNF techniques are usually performed with a
partner and involve both passive movement and active (concentric
and isometric) muscle actions. PNF stretching has been purported as
being superior to other stretching methods for increasing flexibility
(81), possibly because it activates the sensory receptors in the
agonist and antagonist muscles (56), although evidence for this has
not been consistently shown (38, 56). Additionally, PNF stretching
can often be impractical because most of the stretches require a
partner and some expertise.
During a PNF stretch, three specific muscle actions are used to
facilitate the passive stretch. Both isometric and concentric muscle
actions of the antagonist (i.e., the muscle being stretched) are used
before a passive stretch of the antagonist to achieve autogenic
inhibition (see the Proprioceptor: Golgi Tendon Organs sidebar on
this page). The isometric muscle action is referred to as hold and the
concentric muscle action as contract. A concentric muscle action of
the agonist, called agonist contraction, is used during a passive
stretch of the antagonist to achieve reciprocal inhibition. Each
technique also involves passive, static stretches that are referred to
as relax. When using static contractions, these should be held for
approximately 3 to 6 seconds at no more than 20% of maximum
voluntary contraction, with the first repetition generally giving the
greatest benefit. One or two sessions per week are recommended
(81).
Proprioceptor: Golgi Tendon Organs
The Golgi tendon organs (GTOs) are sensitive to increases in muscular tension.
When stimulated, the GTO causes a muscle to reflexively relax. Relaxation that
occurs in the same muscle that is experiencing increased tension is called
autogenic inhibition (18, 22). Autogenic inhibition is accomplished via active
contraction of a muscle immediately before a passive stretch of that same muscle.
Tension built up during the active contraction stimulates the GTO, causing a
reflexive relaxation of the muscle during the subsequent passive stretch.
Relaxation that occurs in the muscle opposing the muscle experiencing the
increased tension is called reciprocal inhibition (18). This occurs when one
883
