A commonly used carbohydrate loading regimen includes three days of a high-
carbohydrate diet in concert with tapering exercise the week before competition
and complete rest the day before the event. The diet should provide adequate
calories and carbohydrate per day: 8 to 10 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram
body weight. This regimen should increase muscle glycogen stores 20% to 40%
above normal (32). However, higher intakes, 10 to 12 grams of carbohydrate per
kilogram body weight, have been suggested for runners during the 36 to 48
hours before a marathon (22).
Studies show that carbohydrate loading is effective in men (129). However,
the studies in women have been mixed. One study examined the effects of
carbohydrate loading on aerobic endurance performance and substrate use in
eight 20- to 40-year-old weight-stable, eumenorrheic female runners with an
average running history of 53 kilometers (33 miles) per week for at least 12
months before the study and a typical carbohydrate intake below 65% of total
caloric intake (9). Each female completed three different 24.2-kilometer (15-
mile) self-paced treadmill performance runs after four days on each experimental
diet 
regimen: 
carbohydrate 
supplementation 
(50% 
of 
calories 
from
carbohydrate), carbohydrate loading and supplementation (75% of calories from
carbohydrate), and placebo (50% of calories from carbohydrate). Both the
carbohydrate-supplemented and carbohydrate loading plus supplementation
groups consumed a 6% carbohydrate-electrolyte solution before exercise (6
mL/kg of body weight) and every 20 minutes during exercise (3 mL/kg of body
weight). And though the carbohydrate-supplemented and carbohydrate loading
plus supplementation groups used a greater portion of energy from carbohydrate
during their runs, there was no significant difference in running performance
between the groups. However, both total calories and grams of carbohydrate per
day were not reported; therefore, it is possible that total calorie or carbohydrate
intakes (or both) were not adequate for the runners. Additionally, given the small
number of subjects included in this study, differences in performance may have
been noted if more subjects had been included (9).
In another study, researchers found that males increased glycogen content
significantly while female athletes did not after increasing carbohydrate intake
from 58% to 74% of calories for four days before a submaximal aerobic
endurance exercise test, due to either inadequate carbohydrate or calorie intake
(or both) or sex differences in glycogen storage (129). In a follow-up study, the
same researchers examined glycogen storage capacity in six well-trained men
and six well-trained women (132). Subjects were randomly assigned to one of
three diets for four days: a high-carbohydrate diet (75% of total calorie intake),
a high-carbohydrate diet plus extra calories (75% of calories from carbohydrate
and a 34% increase in total calories), or their habitual daily diet. In men, both
621
