displayed very large relationships between estimated RIR and actual RIR and
showed that RIR estimations become more accurate when exercise sets are
performed closer to failure. These findings are supported by additional
researchers (100, 198); thus, strength and conditioning professionals must
consider that the relative intensity of each exercise set may need to be higher
for this method to be useful for load prescription purposes.
When implementing RPE and RIR, it is recommended to prescribe intensities
in the form of ranges (e.g., RPE of 7-8 or RIR of 2-3) (176). Although relatively
few studies exist, some have shown that load prescription based on RPE for 8
weeks (73) and RIR for 12 weeks (60) may lead to greater strength
improvements compared to using percentages of 1RM. However, further studies
with additional athlete populations are needed before concrete conclusions can
be drawn. RPE and RIR may be best used if combined with an objective method
(e.g., percentage of 1RM) so that the desired loads for a given exercise can be
determined before using RPE/RIR to adjust the load for autoregulation purposes
(176). Professionals should note that the ability to gauge physical exertion may
vary based on athletic experience (4). For example, inexperienced athletes may
not understand what a near-maximal or maximal resistance training effort feels
like. Thus, strength and conditioning professionals should consider limiting load
autonomy until the athletes can display proficiency with the RPE and RIR
methods.
Set-Repetition Best
Originally proposed by Stone and O’Bryant (162), set-repetition best (SRB) is
a load prescription method that uses relative intensities (i.e., percent ranges)
where the maximum load is estimated based on performances of a given set and
repetition scheme. In other words, SRB determines loads based on percentages
of what was performed in training. Specifically, 5% ranges are prescribed to
allow strength and conditioning professionals to observe the performance of
their athletes and incorporate athlete feedback as a means of autoregulation.
Beyond the ability to adjust weekly training prescription, SRB allows specific
training loads to be estimated when prescribing different set and repetition
schemes (e.g., loads for 3 sets of 5 repetitions should be approximately 15%
less than 3 sets of 2 repetitions) (162, 176). Compared to prescribing xRM
percentages based on single sets, SRB is based on multiple sets so that an
athlete’s training loads are based on relative percentages of the prescribed set-
repetition scheme. Using SRB, any set-repetition scheme can be prescribed and
progressed using relative 5% ranges. For example, 3 sets of 5 repetitions or 3
sets of 10 repetitions can be prescribed with 85% to 90% of the respective
estimated maximal load for 3 sets of 5 or 3 sets of 10, respectively, in week 1 of
1232
