Test planning must address such issues as whether athletes will
be tested all at once or in groups and whether the same person will
administer a given test to all athletes. The main consideration here is
the number of athletes that are being tested. It is preferable to have
the same person administer a given test if time and schedules
permit, because this eliminates the issue of interrater reliability. If
this is not feasible, the test supervisor can allow simple, well-defined
tests (e.g., counting correct push-ups) to be administered by
different testers and tests requiring schooled judgment (as of proper
form in the squat) to be scored by the most skilled and experienced
personnel. As a rule, each tester should administer only one test at a
time, especially when the tests require complex judgments. It is
permissible to have one tester alternate between two testing
stations to avoid wasting time as athletes get ready. However, the
tester must focus on only one test at a time. Planning and practicing
the testing sessions beforehand will go a long way toward ensuring
an efficiently run testing session.
Testing Batteries and Multiple Testing
Trials
When time is limited and the group of athletes is large, duplicate
test setups may be employed to make efficient use of testing time.
For example, when one is conducting the 300-yard (274 m) shuttle,
two test courses can be set up (16). A tester can administer up to
two nonfatiguing tests in sequence to an athlete as long as test
reliability can be maintained. For example, at a two-test lower body
power station staffed by only one tester, the athlete can perform the
vertical jump test and the static jump test immediately afterward.
When multiple trials of a test (e.g., the repeated trials it takes to
find a 1RM) or a battery of tests is performed, allow complete
recovery between trials (31). There should be at least 2 minutes of
rest between attempts that are not close to the athlete’s maximum
and 3 minutes between attempts that are close to the maximum, as
judged by the relative difficulty of the previous trial or testing set
756
