athlete, implement, or both), a certain amount of force has to be
applied over the available time.
Here we have a cause and effect. For example, we know that
vertical jump height is dictated by the vertical velocity that the
jumper achieves at takeoff. Therefore, if a jumper with a mass of 74
kilograms (the athlete’s weight is 74 kg × gravity = 725.94 newtons)
wants to jump 40 centimeters, the athlete will have to take off at a
vertical velocity of 2.82 m/s. This means that the athlete will have to
apply an impulse of 210 Ns (newton-seconds). There is no way
around this. If the athlete cannot achieve the necessary 210 Ns
impulse, the athlete will not achieve the desired jump height. How
the athlete achieves this impulse is another matter, though, because,
as equation 2.2 shows, impulse is the product of net force (force not
including body weight) and time.
To illustrate this point, the athlete could achieve the same jump
height by applying a mean net force of 1,000 newtons over 0.210
seconds, 800 newtons over 0.263 seconds, 600 newtons over 0.350
seconds, or 400 newtons over 0.525 seconds. Of course, we would
ideally like the athlete to get to a point where the athlete can apply
as much force as possible so as to perform the vertical jump (or any
other movement of interest) as quickly as possible. Finally, both
impulse and momentum are vector quantities, which means that
the athlete considers both magnitude (how much) and direction
(which way); this is critical to sport performance. With this in mind,
the strength and conditioning professional can use this information
to develop testing protocols to establish the athlete’s capacity to
apply force over different time periods or against different loads.
This will help the strength and conditioning professional to get a
more complete picture of whether the athlete is able to use current
strength levels and to assess whether they change because of
sporting demands or training. Another way that strength and
conditioning professionals have used biomechanical concepts to
assess the athlete’s capacity to apply force over different time
129
