  35   SKINFOLD MEASUREMENTS
Equipment
Skinfold calipers
Flexible tape measure
Marking pen
Personnel
One tester, one recorder
Procedure (Obtaining a Skinfold Measurement)
1. Skinfold measurements should be made on dry skin, before exercise, to ensure maximum
validity and reliability (70). The number of sites and equations should be selected based on the
population tested (see table 14.35 near the end of the chapter).
2. Grasp the skin firmly with the thumb and index finger to form a fold of skin and subcutaneous
fat.
3. Place the caliper prongs perpendicular to the fold 0.5 inch to 1 inch (approximately 1-2 cm)
from the thumb and index finger.
4. Release the caliper grip so that its spring tension is exerted on the skinfold.
5. Between 1 and 2 seconds after the grip on the caliper has been released, read the dial on the
caliper to the nearest 0.5 millimeter.
6. Obtain one measurement from each test site, and then repeat all test sites for a second trial. If
the measurements do not differ by more than 10%, average the two measurements to the
nearest 0.5 millimeter. Otherwise, take one or more additional measurements until two of the
measurements are within 10%, and average those two measurements to the nearest 0.5
millimeter.
Procedure (Measuring the Selected Site and Calculating the Body Fat Percentage)
1. There are specific equations for estimating body density (Db) (then, in turn, percent body fat
[%BF]) for different populations. First, select the equation appropriate for the athlete from
table 14.35 near the end of the chapter.
2. Refer to the chosen equation and related instructions and mark the skin at the appropriate
anatomical sites (69, 120):
Chest—a diagonal fold one-half the distance between the anterior axillary line and the
nipple for men (figure 14.30a)
Thigh—a vertical fold on the anterior aspect of the thigh, midway between the hip and
knee joints (figure 14.30b)
Abdomen—a vertical fold 1 inch (2.5 cm) to the right (relative to the athlete) of the
umbilicus (figure 14.30c)
Triceps—a vertical fold on the posterior midline of the upper arm (over the triceps muscle),
halfway between the acromion and the olecranon processes (the arm should be in
anatomical position with the elbow extended and relaxed [figure 14.30d])
Suprailium—a diagonal fold above the crest of the ilium at the spot where an imaginary line
would come down from the anterior axillary line (figure 14.30e) (some prefer the measure
to be taken more laterally, at the midaxillary line)
Midaxilla—a vertical fold on the midaxillary line at the level of the xiphoid process of the
sternum (figure 14.30f)
Subscapula—a fold taken on a diagonal line that extends from the vertebral border to a
point 0.5 inch to 1 inch (1 to 2 cm) from the inferior angle of the scapula (figure 14.30g)
815
