the athlete will perform exercises correctly, even those that are relatively easy to
perform. Thus, a strength and conditioning professional should provide
appropriate exercise progressions and regressions that are based on each
athlete’s technique and their ability to maintain their technique with heavier
loads. An example of squat progression and regression exercises is displayed in
figure 18.7.
FIGURE 18.7 Squat progression and regression exercise examples. Note: Individual exercises may also
be progressed or regressed using different loads. In addition, advanced athletes may progress the front
squat and back squat using variable resistance training with chains or bands as well as accentuated
eccentric loading.
Availability of Resistance Training Equipment
The availability of training equipment must be considered in the selection of
exercises. A lack of certain equipment may necessitate selecting exercises that
are not as sport specific. For example, the absence of Olympic-type barbells with
revolving sleeves would preclude exercises such as the power clean, and an
insufficient supply of barbell plates may result in substituting exercises that do
not require as much resistance; for example, the back squat could be replaced
by the front squat.
Available Training Time Per Session
The strength and conditioning professional should weigh the value of certain
exercises against the time it takes to perform them. Some exercises take longer
to complete than others. If time for a training session is limited, exercises that
are more time efficient may need to be given priority over others. For example,
the machine leg press could be selected instead of the free weight lunge to train
the hips and thighs of a 100-meter sprinter. The time required to move the
machine pin to the correct slot in a weight stack and perform 5 repetitions of a
machine leg press is much less than the time required for the lunge exercise, for
which the athlete must load both ends of a bar, attach the locks, back out of the
power rack, establish a stable starting position, perform 5 repetitions of each
leg, and rerack the bar. Although the machine leg press is less sport specific, the
1209
