(~4–8.5 standard drinks) alcohol ingestion after strenuous resistance or high-
intensity interval training impedes exercise-induced phosphorylation of the
mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) pathway and reduces rates
of muscle protein synthesis, an effect that also appears to be most prominent in
men (60, 165). Alcohol also has known diuretic effects, causing an increase in
excess urine production of about 10 milliliters for every gram of ethanol ingested
(63). Therefore, hydration-related effects are most significant when concentrated
alcohol solutions are consumed, and consumption of dilute alcohol solutions or
alcohol with adequate additional fluid intake can offset the diuretic effect (191). In
addition, large alcohol doses can dramatically affect thermoregulatory ability,
augmenting environmental heat loss at low ambient temperatures (88, 89).
Finally, alcohol can impair exercise performance and recovery via effects on
sleep and autonomic function. For example, evening binge alcohol consumption (4-
5 standard drinks within 2 hours) disrupts sleeping cardiac vagal tone and reduces
sleep quality (53, 93), and increases sympathoexcitation and disrupts blood
pressure regulation the following morning (94). These disruptions may serve to
increase cardiovascular strain and impair performance during subsequent exercise,
although this has not been directly tested. It is important to note that many of
these effects are likely dependent on the amount of alcohol consumed, and studies
to tease out dose-dependent effects (particularly at high doses) are difficult both
logistically and ethically.
Evidence also shows that chronic alcohol consumption can impair muscle
metabolism and impede training-induced adaptations. Skeletal muscle from middle-
aged men and women with chronic alcohol abuse displays increased catabolic
markers (e.g., MurF-1, ubiquinated proteins), decreased anabolic markers (e.g.,
phosphorylated 4E-BP1), and decreased insulin receptor substrate 1, which plays a
critical role in transmitting signals from insulin and IGF-1 to coordinate cellular
growth and metabolism (189, 190). Therefore, chronic alcohol consumption can
impede training-related adaptations and promote signatures consistent with
myopathy in muscle, but the degree to which these effects occur are likely directly
related to the degree of alcohol use (or abuse).
Adverse Effects
β-Blockers may also have an ergolytic effect (reduce performance).
Studies have shown that β-blockers impair the cardiovascular
response to exercise by reducing maximal heart rate, oxygen
consumption, and 10-kilometer (6.2 miles) race time performance
(6). Also, β-blockers are associated with an increased rating of
perceived exertion (205). Risks associated with these drugs include
bronchospasm, heart failure, prolonged hypoglycemia, bradycardia,
heart block, and intermittent claudication (78).
698
