others having observed an ergogenic effect (141, 149). For example,
a dose of 200 milligrams per pound body mass (0.44 g/kg body
weight) given 60 to 90 minutes before exercise led to significant
improvement (about 20% greater) in leg muscular endurance during
maximal isometric knee extensions (105). However, more research is
needed before sodium citrate can be recommended before a
workout or competition for performance enhancement.
Adverse Effects
Sodium citrate may possess MBC and has been used without the
typical gastrointestinal discomfort usually associated with sodium
bicarbonate ingestion (13, 141). Even though it appears that the
adverse effects of sodium citrate supplementation are lower than
those of sodium bicarbonate, ingestion of 0.4 to 0.6 grams per
kilogram body mass sodium citrate has the potential to cause
gastrointestinal distress (161). The gastrointestinal response seems
to vary between individuals; therefore, athletes should individually
test sodium citrate supplementation before using it in competition.
L-Carnitine
L-carnitine is synthesized from the amino acids lysine and
methionine and is responsible for the transport of fatty acids from
the cytosol into the mitochondria to be oxidized for energy.
Carnitine’s role in lipid oxidation has generated interest in its efficacy
as a dietary supplement, primarily to enhance exercise performance
by increasing fat use and sparing muscle glycogen. However, studies
examining L-carnitine’s role as an ergogenic aid for increasing lipid
oxidation and subsequently enhancing performance are inconsistent
(85). Although Bacurau and colleagues (11) showed enhanced fatty
acid oxidation following three weeks of L-carnitine supplementation,
which was attributed to a greater carnitine content in the muscle,
most studies have been unable to demonstrate elevated muscle
carnitine levels following supplementation (218). This may be related
to limits in the amount of carnitine that can be absorbed through
oral supplementation, or potentially related to limits in the amount of
711
