digestibility (or bioavailability) into account as well as a protein’s
ability to provide the essential amino acids necessary for the
synthesis of body proteins and other metabolites, they do not take
into account how other compounds within the food alter the
bioavailability of the protein’s amino acids. Foods contain
antinutritional factors—compounds that reduce the digestion and
absorption of a nutrient, making it less available for use by the body
(92). Several antinutritional factors lead to digestive losses and
structural changes of amino acids that limit amino acid bioavailability
(110). For instance, during cooking, some foods will brown; this
browning, called a Maillard reaction, leads to compounds that can
decrease the bioavailability of certain amino acids. Although the
majority of plant-based foods fall short in one or more essential
amino acids, all people, not just vegetarians and vegans (those who
consume only plants and plant products—no meat, fish, poultry,
eggs, milk, or other foods that come from animals), can meet their
protein needs by consuming a variety of plant foods including
legumes, vegetables, seeds, nuts, rice, and whole grains that
provide different amino acids so that all essential amino acids are
consumed over the course of the day (152). Novel plant-based meat
alternatives are also an emerging option to meet dietary protein
needs, particularly given that our world population is growing and
living longer, and animal proteins alone cannot sustain all of our
protein needs.
While 
dietary 
recommendations 
are 
stated 
as 
protein
requirements, the actual requirement is for amino acids. The need
for amino acids in sedentary, healthy adults results from the
constant turnover of cells and cellular proteins. During cell turnover
—the constant breakdown and regeneration of cells—the body’s free
amino acid pool is the immediate and largest supplier of amino acids
(105). The pool is replenished from dietary protein digestion, as well
as the amino acids released from tissue turnover. Substantially more
protein is turned over daily than is ordinarily consumed, indicating
that amino acids are recycled (119). This process is not completely
551
