illustrated by three different vertical jump tests: a static squat jump,
a countermovement jump, and an approach jump with several steps.
As the rate of stretch increases, an athlete’s absolute performance in
these tests improves; the static squat jump results in the lowest
jump height, and the approach jump results in the highest. The
static squat jump requires the athlete to get into a squatting position
(i.e., 90-degree hip flexion and 90-degree knee flexion) followed by
a jump up. This jump does not use stored elastic energy and is too
slow to allow potentiation from the stretch reflex because there is
essentially no eccentric phase. The countermovement jump uses a
rapid eccentric element (i.e., a partial squat) followed immediately
by rapid concentric muscle activity (i.e., a jump up). The rapid
eccentric phase allows the athlete to store and use elastic energy in
the stretched musculotendinous unit and stimulates the stretch
reflex, thereby potentiating muscle activity (7, 33). The approach
(one- or two-step) jump uses an even quicker, more forceful
eccentric phase than the countermovement jump; the increased rate
of stretch during the eccentric phase allows a further increase in
vertical jump height (4, 6, 8, 29).
The type of ground contact (and, hence, the rate of stretch and
duration of the amortization phase, which affects the return of
elastic energy) is influenced by the technique used during rebound
actions. Cappa and Behm (13) demonstrated that flat-foot landing
techniques resulted in significantly longer ground contact times in
comparison to active forefoot landings (which also had a 45%
greater rate of force production) due to the increased contribution of
neuromuscular 
and 
elastic 
force 
production. 
Strength 
and
conditioning professionals should note that technique is therefore an
essential factor in the effectiveness of the SSC, rate of force
development, and subsequent kinematic variables of the movement.
Strength and conditioning professionals may consider
that the duration of the amortization phase may lead to
activities 
that 
promote 
different 
movement
1267
