conditioning professionals use the basic two-component (fat and lean mass) model. With a trained
and competent tester, the skinfold measurement technique is the most valid and reliable (r = 0.99)
means for assessing body fatness that is generally available to the strength and conditioning
professional and is preferable to body circumference methods (95). Other methods available to
strength and conditioning professionals include bioimpedance devices and total body
plethysmography, although dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) is often labeled as a gold standard.
The skinfold method uses calipers that measure the thickness of a double layer of finger-pinched
skin and subcutaneous fat. A good skinfold measurement device should squeeze the fold of skin
and fat with constant pressure regardless of the amount of tissue being measured (41, 69, 120).
Circumference methods may be added, because they are relatively quick and simple and can yield
important chronic disease risk information. For example, waist circumference can assess abdominal
fat, and a high waist circumference is associated with an increased risk for type 2 diabetes, high
cholesterol, high blood pressure, and certain types of cardiac disease (69).
Anthropometry
Anthropometry, which is the science of measurement applied to the human body, generally
includes measurements of height, weight, and selected body girths (69). Ideally, height should be
measured with a stadiometer. If a stadiometer is not available, measurement of height requires a
flat wall against which the athlete stands, with a measuring tape attached or unattached to the
wall. Height is usually measured without shoes to the nearest quarter-inch or half-centimeter (103).
The most accurate body mass or body weight measurement is performed with a certified balance
scale, which is generally more reliable than a spring scale and should be calibrated on a regular
basis (103). A calibrated electronic scale is an acceptable alternative. Athletes should be weighed
while wearing minimal dry clothing (e.g., workout shorts and T-shirt, no shoes). For comparison
measurements at a later date, they should dress similarly and be weighed at the same time of day.
The most reliable body mass measurements are made in the morning upon rising, after elimination
and before ingestion of food or fluids. Level of hydration can result in variability of body mass
(weight). Thus, athletes should be encouraged to avoid eating salty food (which increases water
retention) the day before weighing and to go to bed normally hydrated.
The most reliable girth measurements are usually obtained with the aid of a flexible measuring
tape equipped with a spring-loaded attachment at the end that, when pulled out to a specified
mark, exerts a fixed amount of tension on the tape. Girth measurements should be made at the
beginning of a training period for comparison with subsequent measurements (69, 103).
773
