The distribution of light throughout the facility is important to
avoid shadowy areas or excessive glare. Glare from direct overhead
lighting is especially a concern for users lying on horizontal benches
or exercise mats (18). Windows can help make a facility feel more
open and modern, and mirrors may enhance the amount of light
that comes in by reflecting it to spots in the room without natural
light (2). Light-emitting diode (LED) lights are a popular choice
because of their extended life span and energy efficiency (2). Lights
with color temperatures between 4,000° and 5,000° Kelvin are
considered best for strength and conditioning facilities because they
resemble daylight, provide optimal visibility for enhanced safety, and
can have an energizing effect. Finally, adjustable lighting controls,
automated on-and-off settings, and motion sensors also can be
considered to reduce power consumption, energy costs, and
maintenance (11).
Room Temperature, Humidity, and
Ventilation
A strength and conditioning facility needs to maintain a comfortable
training temperature. The heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC) system should have the capability to heat and cool individual
sections of the facility. Most sources indicate that between 68 °F and
78 °F (20-26 °C) is an appropriate temperature range, with many
suggesting an optimal range of 68 °F to 74 °F (20-23 °C) (2, 5, 18).
If the facility is too hot or too cold, the athletes and staff may be
uncomfortable and the quality of training will be affected.
Relative humidity should also be monitored in the strength and
conditioning facility (6). In any space where there is physical activity,
relative humidity should not exceed 60%. This helps to prevent
bacterial and microbial growth, avoiding the spread of infections and
disease (2, 15). In addition, areas in a facility with excessive
moisture can contribute to rust and damage weight room equipment
(5). This may be more of a concern if the weight training facility is
located near a humid pool or spa area within the building. Ensuring
1745
