aerobic training in disciplines such as cycling and running can lead to
beneficial adaptations in movement economy through improvements
in motor recruitment. Chronic aerobic training can result in increased
muscle coactivation, enhanced leg stiffness, and a greater ratio of
eccentric-to-concentric muscle activity, enabling athletes to use
stored elastic energy more efficiently, reducing the metabolic cost of
exercise (73a). Supporting research has shown that trained cyclists
and runners exhibit less variability in muscle activity between pedal
strokes and strides, respectively, as well as shorter durations of
muscle activity compared to their novice counterparts (21a).
Furthermore, multisport athletes, such as triathletes, demonstrate
more extensive and variable muscle coactivation, along with less
modulation and refined patterns of muscle activity during cycling and
running when compared to single-sport athletes (21a, 21b) reflecting
interference with neuromuscular adaptations from multisport
training.
Muscular Adaptations
One of the fundamental adaptive responses to aerobic endurance
training is an increase in the aerobic capacity of the trained
musculature. This adaptation allows the athlete to perform a given
absolute intensity of exercise with greater ease. More impressively,
after training, an athlete can exercise at a greater relative intensity
of a now-higher maximal aerobic power. Thus, measuring an
athlete’s maximal oxygen uptake only before and after aerobic
endurance training may not accurately portray his or her ability to
perform during competition. For example, an athlete who can run
the marathon at a pace equal to 75% of maximal oxygen uptake
may, after training, be able to maintain a pace that is 80% of
maximal aerobic power. This adaptation occurs as a result of an
improvement in what is called the athlete’s critical power or, more
simply, the athlete’s maximal oxidative energy capacity, which also
means that the exercising muscle’s rate of lactate production
matches the rate of clearance by muscles and other tissues (127a).
346
