then the transition, followed by the second pull, and ending with the
catch. After all skills have been practiced multiple times, the snatch
is practiced. Progressive-part training has the athlete practice
the first two parts in isolation before practicing these parts together
(66). The athlete then practices the third subcomponent before
practicing all three parts together. In the snatch, the athlete first
practices the first pull and then the transition, then the first pull with
the transition. The athlete then practices the second pull before
practicing the first pull, transition, and second pull as a combined
skill. This progression continues until the whole skill has been
reintegrated. Repetitive part training has the athlete practice
only the first part in isolation; then each subsequent part is added
until the whole task is reintegrated (66). The athlete in this instance
would first practice the first pull; then the first pull with the
transition; then the first pull, transition, and second pull; and so
forth. With use of simplification, characteristics of the task can be
added gradually, increasing the difficulty of the task. The choice of
sequencing will depend on the task and the goals of the given
training session.
Random Practice
Traditionally, skills are practiced in a blocked fashion, such that the
athlete practices the same skill multiple times before progressing to
another skill. In random practice, multiple skills are practiced in a
random order during a given practice session. For example, during
blocked practice, the athlete performs multiple squat depth jumps
before progressing to another skill. In random practice, an athlete
may perform a squat depth jump, a depth jump with a lateral
movement, a split squat jump, and a side-to-side push-off in a
random order. The athlete continues to repeat these skills in a
random order. While performance on each individual skill initially
declines during random practice, learning is facilitated by this
practice design (53). When applied in a sport setting, an integration
of blocked and random practice (a few repetitive attempts at each
526
