systolic blood pressure; a measure of myocardial work) has been
shown to either remain constant or decrease following resistance
training. Stroke volume has been shown to increase in absolute
magnitude but not relative to body surface area or lean body mass.
That is, stroke volume will increase as lean tissue mass increases
during long-term resistance training. Finally, resistance training may
either not change or slightly decrease total cholesterol and low-
density lipoproteins and increase high-density lipoproteins (80).
Therefore, heavy resistance training does little to enhance resting
cardiac function, but greater improvements may result from
adaptations to a high-volume program with short rest periods (i.e.,
bodybuilding or circuit training) in which the overall continuity of the
exercise stress in a workout is much higher.
Chronic resistance training also alters cardiac dimensions.
Increased left ventricular wall thickness and mass have been
reported, but the increase disappears when expressed relative to
body surface area or lean body mass. It is thought that this increase
may result from exposure to intermittently elevated blood pressures
and increases in intrathoracic pressure in addition to accommodating
changes from increases in lean body mass and body size. Highly
resistance-trained athletes have greater than normal absolute
posterior left ventricular and intraventricular septum wall thickness
(57). Little or no change in left ventricular chamber size or volume is
observed with resistance training; this is a major difference between
resistance exercise and aerobic exercise. Greater than normal
absolute left and right ventricular end-diastolic and end-systolic
volumes have been reported in bodybuilders but not weightlifters
(55), which indicates that high-volume training may be more
conducive to increasing absolute left ventricular volumes. It is
important to note that bodybuilders frequently incorporate aerobic
exercise into their training programs in an effort to metabolize body
fat and promote a lean body composition; therefore, it is possible
that some of these adaptations have been brought about, in part, by
aerobic endurance training. Bodybuilders as well as weightlifters
326
