electron transport chain, and lipid oxidation), which continuously
supply energy at rest and for lower intensity activities (62). The
oxidative pathways depend on the cardiorespiratory system’s ability
to supply oxygen and remove metabolic wastes, and research
reviews have presented differences in males and females under
various conditions (9, 29, 96, 186). Female endurance athletes have
been shown to be more fatigue resistant during prolonged events,
despite having overall lower aerobic capacity (V̇ O2max) relative to
body size and slower performance times than males (17, 48). This is
thought to be due to muscle fiber type distribution (165), with
females having a greater proportion of type I oxidative fibers on
average. Females therefore oxidize a greater amount of fat and a
lesser amount of carbohydrate and protein (40, 170). This finding is
supported by Cardinale (2018), who determined that females have
close to 33% greater mitochondrial respiration than males. These
differences may present an advantage to female athletes in most
types of endurance activities, including ultraendurance events (174).
Training adaptations in the aerobic energy pathways differ in
magnitude between males and females with regard to the
cardiovascular system in particular (145), which affects oxygen
delivery to the muscle tissue and subsequent oxidative energy
production. In females, more modest increases in blood volume and
similar or lesser increases in heart dimensions such as left
ventricular chamber size and wall thickness result from aerobic
endurance training (11, 44) when compared to males. However,
female athletes have similar adaptations compared to males with
regard to left ventricle function, including a greater ejection fraction
(159). Females also present more efficient oxygen cost of running
than males at various running intensities (76) while maintaining their
running economy across a range of velocities. All of these factors
affect overall aerobic performance, with females compensating for
smaller hearts and less oxygen-carrying capacity by different
mechanisms than males.
453
