uptake to be able to calculate an exercise MET level. However, the
use of METs in exercise prescription is typically limited to clinical
populations.
Intensity Measuring Technology
Previously due to cost, power devices for cycling such as power
measuring cranks and hubs to monitor exercise intensity were
mostly only used by professionals and top-level amateurs. Research
has supported their use from the perspective of demonstrating that
they provide valid and reliable power measurement (49). However,
due to the advancements in technology, it is common to see athletes
of all levels using technology to monitor exercise intensity. This
technology ranges from smart watches to running stride power
meters to power measuring cranks. Each technology has its own
reasons for being selected. For example, using power measuring
cranks in cycling has an advantage over other measures because
metabolic rate is closely related to mechanical power production
(30). Also, using power as an intensity measure allows reproducible
intensity efforts regardless of environmental conditions, which may
influence other measures of intensity such as heart rate and velocity
(30). Irrespective of the technology selected to monitor power,
speed, or similar variables, they should have training zones allocated
to them that reflect the athlete’s training status.
Technology also extends to advanced indoor trainers such as
treadmills, rowers, and ski and cycle ergometers. Due to the large
variety of technological devices currently available, it is not possible
to address each manufacturer individually. However, some common
points to consider are whether the measurements of power, speed,
stride length, stride frequency, and the like are valid, accurate, and
reliable. While a number of these commonly used devices have been
research tested, many have not. Hence, it is important to review the
product before buying. Also, given the number of variables that can
be measured, it is important to set training intensity or target ranges
before 
using 
them. 
Additionally, 
strength 
and 
conditioning
1530
