may further increase glycogen resynthesis via an increase in the
transcription and transcription rate of certain genes responsible for
training adaptations. However, the researchers cautioned that these
results should not necessarily be used by strength and conditioning
professionals and practitioners to guide practice, because low
glycogen concentrations may reduce the period of time an athlete is
able to train and may increase risk of overtraining. This is one
reason why it is important to monitor the effects of the training load
on athletes. Further, strength and conditioning professionals and
athletes need to understand that adaptation takes place during
periods of rest, and undertaking more frequent training can affect
the recovery process and, ultimately, the level of adaptation.
Recovery from individual training sessions is essential if the
athlete is to derive maximum benefits from the subsequent training
session. Exercise performance has been shown to improve following
relative rest from difficult training sessions (16). Obtaining sufficient
rest, becoming rehydrated, and restoring fuel sources are critical
issues for the athlete during recovery. Physical and mental relaxation
and avoidance of strenuous physical activity are particularly
important following days of high-intensity or long-duration training.
Postexercise ingestion of adequate fluids and electrolytes is
important for replacing those lost during training. If the training
session was especially long or intense, postexercise carbohydrate
intake is important for replacing the muscle and liver glycogen stores
that were likely depleted, as is the ingestion of protein to aid muscle
repair and recovery. More detailed information on this topic can be
found in chapter 11.
Evidence suggests that while most aerobic endurance athletes
across a variety of sports (e.g., cycling, running, walking, triathlon)
use nutrition, hydration, stretching, and active recovery, other forms
of recovery (e.g., compression garments and ice baths) are not used
as frequently or at all (13, 19). In addition, while many athletes
believe in the benefits of different recovery strategies for
competition, such as active recovery, self-massage, and massage,
1522
