generally informal and nonquantitative. In other fields, such as
psychology, tests may be deliberately constructed to have poor face
validity because if examinees realize what a test or test item is
supposed to measure, they can answer deceptively to manipulate
their scores. For tests of basic athletic abilities, however, face validity
is desirable based on the assumption that anyone taking a test of
physical ability wants to do well and is thus motivated by a test that
appears to measure a relevant capability.
Content Validity
Content validity is the assessment by experts that the testing
covers all relevant subtopics or component abilities in appropriate
proportions (1). For athletic testing, these include all the component
abilities needed for a particular sport or sport position. Examples of
component abilities in athletics are jumping ability, sprinting ability,
and lower body strength (37). For example, a test battery for
potential soccer players should include, at minimum, tests of
sprinting speed, agility, aerobic endurance, and kicking power. To
ensure content validity, the test developer should list the ability
components to be assessed and make sure they are all represented
on the test. In addition, the proportion of the total score attributable
to a particular component ability should be proportional to the
importance of that component to total performance. While the terms
face 
validity 
and 
content 
validity 
are 
sometimes 
used
interchangeably, the latter relates to actual validity while the former
relates to the appearance of validity to nonexperts (1).
Criterion Validity
Criterion validity is the extent to which test scores are associated
with some other measure of the same ability. There are two types of
criterion validity: concurrent and predictive.
Concurrent validity is the extent to which test scores are
associated with those of other accepted tests that measure the same
ability. Criterion validity is often estimated statistically. For example,
738
