Women of childbearing age, teenage girls, pregnant women,
infants, and toddlers have the greatest need for iron and therefore
an increased risk of becoming deficient. In addition, distance
runners, vegetarian athletes, female athletes, those who lose a
significant amount of blood during their menstrual cycle, people who
take excessive amounts of antacids, and people with certain
digestive diseases such as celiac disease have an increased risk of
developing iron deficiency anemia (72).
The two types of iron found in food are heme and nonheme iron.
Heme iron, derived from hemoglobin, is found in foods that originally
contained hemoglobin and myoglobin—animal foods including red
meats, fish, and poultry. Heme iron is absorbed better than
nonheme iron, and absorption is not affected by anything else we
eat. Approximately 15% to 35% of the heme iron consumed is
actually absorbed (112).
Nonheme iron is the form of iron found in all other, non-meat
foods including vegetables, grains, and iron-fortified breakfast
cereal. Only 2% to 20% of nonheme iron is absorbed (160). While
heme iron is not affected by compounds found in food eaten
concurrently, many factors affect the absorption of nonheme iron.
For instance, the nonheme iron in spinach is bound to a substance
called phytic acid, the storage form of phosphorus in plants. Phytic
acid decreases the absorption of nonheme iron. In addition, several
other substances may decrease the absorption of nonheme iron,
including tannins (found in tea and wine), calcium (found in dairy
and multivitamins), polyphenols, phytates (found in legumes and
whole grains), and some of the proteins in soy. A person can
increase the amount of nonheme iron absorbed by consuming
vitamin C–rich foods or beverages at the same time or consuming a
nonheme source at the same time heme iron is consumed. For
example, pairing spinach with meat increases iron absorption from
spinach (72, 160).
There are many supplemental forms of iron; each supplies a
different amount of elemental iron while also varying in
587
