greater number of fibers in trained populations. In this scenario it is
difficult to determine if the difference is due to preexisting,
pretraining differences in fiber number (i.e., due to genetics) or due
to training-induced hyperplasia. One must also consider that the
procedures scientists perform on animals simply cannot be
completed 
in 
humans 
for 
ethical 
and 
logistical 
reasons.
Consequently, some of the more convincing data supporting skeletal
muscle hyperplasia emerge from animal studies (64, 77). When
examining hyperplasia in animal models, researchers remove whole
muscle and strip back the fascia in order to analyze muscle fiber
numbers longitudinally under a microscope. In humans, removal of
whole muscle is not feasible. Instead, needle biopsy techniques are
used to harvest a small sample of muscle tissue, which is then
examined in cross section, and fiber number calculations are
performed indirectly using extrapolation mathematics. While
hyperplasia cannot be completely ruled out, it does not appear to be
a major strategy for muscle tissue adaptation to resistance training,
and, if it occurs at all, it involves only a small amount of the added
tissue (maybe less than 10%) if the conditions are optimal. It may
be hypothesized that if hyperplasia occurs, it may be in response to
muscle fibers reaching a theoretical upper limit in size, which may
occur in athletes using anabolic steroids and other growth agents or
undergoing long-term training that produces large to extreme levels
of hypertrophy. This remains to be fully elucidated and continues to
be an area of contention among scientific researchers.
Fiber Type–Specific Size Changes
The magnitude of muscle hypertrophy experienced following
anaerobic training is associated with muscle fiber type. Muscle fibers
must be activated in order to promote significant hypertrophy (38).
During resistance training, both type I and type II muscle fibers
have the potential to be recruited, and only via activation do type I
or type II fibers receive a signaling mechanism that initiates the
cascade of regulatory processes promoting protein synthesis.
303
