strength, power, hypertrophy, or muscular endurance. Despite a potential desire
or need to make improvements in two different areas (e.g., strength and
muscular endurance), an effort should be made to concentrate on only one
training outcome per training block. This can be accomplished using an
emphasis/de-emphasis approach wherein specific fitness characteristics are
targeted during different training periods while others are de-emphasized (67).
An example of how the strength and conditioning professional may prioritize the
resistance training emphases during the four main sport seasons is shown in
table 18.2. However, while focusing on the development of a specific physical
characteristic, it is important to provide sufficient stimuli for the maintenance of
other physical characteristics, especially if they are to be emphasized in
subsequent blocks of training. A common strategy in many team sports is to
alternate between strength (i.e., strength–speed) and power (i.e., speed–
strength) development in-season, because the higher volumes associated with
strength endurance– and hypertrophy-focused training can induce excessive
fatigue and potentially result in an increased injury risk. However, while this may
be easier to accomplish with individual sports or events (e.g., track and field), a
team-based sport (e.g., basketball, soccer, hockey) that requires several fitness
characteristics for success may have to use a multitargeted approach within
training to develop those multiple characteristics simultaneously (177). Within
this approach, it has been suggested that compatible fitness characteristics (e.g.,
strength–power and speed) be trained simultaneously while avoiding
incompatible characteristics (e.g., speed and cardiovascular endurance). An
emphasis/de-emphasis approach can still be used in these situations (see
chapter 22 for more information).
TABLE 18.2 Example of General Training Priorities by Sport
Season
Sport season
Priority given to
Resistance training goal*
Sport
practice
Resistance
training
Off-season
Low
High
Hypertrophy and muscular endurance (initially); strength
and power (later)
Preseason
Medium
Medium
Sport and movement specific (i.e., strength, power, or
muscular endurance, depending on the sport)
In-season
High
Low
Maintenance of preseason training goal; if in-season is
long, these goals may alternate between different
characteristics (e.g., strength and power)
*The actual training goals and priorities are based on the specific sport or activity and may differ from the
goals listed here.
1201
