Essential Terminology
Bioenergetics, or the flow of energy in a biological system,
concerns primarily the conversion of macronutrients—carbohydrate,
protein, and fats, which contain chemical energy—into biologically
usable forms of energy. It is the breakdown of the chemical bonds in
these macronutrients that provides the energy necessary to perform
biological work.
The breakdown of large molecules into smaller molecules,
associated with the release of energy, is termed catabolism. The
synthesis of larger molecules from smaller molecules can be
accomplished using the energy released from catabolic reactions;
this building-up process is termed anabolism. The breakdown of
protein into amino acids is an example of catabolism, while the
formation of proteins from amino acids is an anabolic process.
Exergonic reactions are energy-releasing reactions and are
generally catabolic. Endergonic reactions require energy and
include anabolic processes and the contraction of muscle.
Metabolism is the sum of all catabolic or exergonic and anabolic or
endergonic reactions in a biological system. Energy derived from
catabolic or exergonic reactions is used to drive anabolic or
endergonic reactions through an intermediate molecule, adenosine
triphosphate (ATP). ATP allows the transfer of energy from
exergonic to endergonic reactions. Thus, exergonic (i.e., energy-
releasing) reactions are coupled with endergonic (i.e., energy-
requiring) reactions, based on the production or breakdown of ATP,
respectively. Without an adequate supply of ATP, muscular activity
and muscle growth would not be possible because the process
reflects the metabolic system’s current ability to supply the demand
of the required activity. Thus, when an exercise steady state is
achieved, ATP supply meets ATP demand. However, fatigue results
when ATP supply does not meet the ATP requirements demanded by
a given activity. Following a period of appropriate conditioning, the
metabolic systems of the body adapt to be better able to supply the
176
