Measuring Parameters of Athletic Performance
Athleticism incorporates many physical abilities, some of which are much more amenable to training
than others. Such abilities may be called general components of athletic performance—that is,
abilities that enable effective responses to the various physical demands of a specific sport or
event. This section focuses on how each component can be tested and highlights relevant issues.
Maximum Muscular Strength (Low-Speed Strength)
Maximum muscular strength tests can be split into dynamic or isometric demands; those that
involve relatively low movement speeds reflect low-speed muscular strength. In this case,
muscular strength is related to the force a muscle or muscle group can exert in one maximal effort
while maintaining proper form, and it can be quantified by the maximum weight that can be lifted
once (the 1-repetition maximum [1RM]) in exercises such as the bench press or back squat, or the
maximum force that can be exerted at a particular isokinetic velocity (5, 6, 45, 72, 100, 101, 103,
109, 124). Because 1RM tests do not require expensive equipment and reflect the kind of dynamic
ability necessary in sport, they are the maximal strength tests of choice for most strength and
conditioning professionals.
In general, 1RM tests are administered after the athlete has warmed up by performing a few
sets of the test exercise with submaximal loads, beginning with a relatively light load. The first
attempt is usually with approximately 50% of the athlete’s estimated 1RM weight. After the athlete
has rested enough to feel recovered from the previous attempt (1-5 min, depending on the
difficulty of the attempt), the strength and conditioning professional increases the weight
somewhat, based on the ease with which the previous trial was performed. A skilled strength and
conditioning professional should, within three to five attempts following warm-up, be able to find
the athlete’s 1RM load to within a few percentage points of the true value.
While testing the athlete’s 1RM is a time-tested and reliable way to assess maximal strength,
many strength and conditioning professionals have begun to use isometric tests to more
comprehensively assess the athlete’s maximal force production capacities (5, 6, 19, 29, 45, 72, 100,
101, 103, 124). These types of tests are particularly appealing because they are nonfatiguing and
are often integrated into an athlete’s regular training program (i.e., training is testing). Typically
administered with the use of a force plate (or pair of force plates) or force cell that is integrated
into a custom testing device, these tests allow for the generation of a force–time curve that can be
used to quantify the rate at which force is produced as well as the maximum force exerted against
an immovable object (e.g., bar) (29, 92). Regardless of the isometric testing device used, these
tests are performed after a suitable warm-up, often progressing from 50% effort to 90% before
performing three maximum isometric trials that are performed for 3- to 5-second duration (29, 59).
Given that strength is highly influenced by body mass, expressing maximum muscular strength
test results relative to body weight is valuable. Ratio standards can be used to determine relative
strength (43) by dividing the weight lifted (in a dynamic test) or force produced (in an isometric
test) by the athlete’s body weight. Relative strength from a 1RM test can be expressed as the total
weight lifted (lb or kg) divided by body mass (lb or kg). To express the same from an isometric test,
maximal force exerted in newtons is divided by bodyweight converted into newtons (lb × 4.44, or
kg × 9.81). Ratio scaling allows comparisons between athletes normalized to body weight.
However, this simple approach assumes that strength is directly proportional to body mass (43),
which is not necessarily the case. Therefore, allometric scaling has also been recommended,
particularly in settings with wide variation in body size and strength. Dividing strength by body
mass raised to an appropriate power can eliminate the effects of body mass, although debate
remains regarding the most appropriate scaling exponents (33, 43, 83).
765
