be implemented when working with heat acclimation protocols. For
example, always begin well hydrated, maintain hydration, ensure
cooling equipment is available (e.g., cold-water immersion bath or
ice vests), and signs and symptoms of exertional heat illness should
be well known to athletes and staff and be posted. For more
information, readers are directed to Pryor and colleagues (107).
To determine individual athlete adaptation and decay rates, heat
acclimatization protocols should be practiced months before
competition in the heat (9), and athletes should also undertake a
practice heat event in similar conditions to those they expect to
perform in on competition day (9). It is recommended that the
environment have a wet-bulb globe temperature >30 °C (>86 °F) to
provide the necessary stress to elicit heat adaptations in core body
temperature as well as induce a higher sweat response (28).
A reduction in training duration or intensity followed by a
progressive increase over the protocol period may be required
compared to the usual training load, on the initial introduction of a
heat acclimation protocol (107). In addition, it may be necessary to
use a combination of exercise and passive heat exposure (e.g.,
sauna or hot-water immersion) sessions as the athlete commences
and progresses through the heat acclimation process to enable
integration with the athlete’s training schedule (54). For both hot
sauna (118) and hot-water immersion (147, 148) postexercise
sessions have been found to provide heat acclimation and
performance benefits. However, to be successful, it is recommended
that the heat stimulus be applied for a duration of 30 minutes per
session, ideally on consecutive days, when possible to maximize heat
acclimation adaptations (61). This process enables athletes to
maintain or elevate their core body temperature and increase their
sweat rate. An additional benefit of passive heat exposure is that it
can reduce the volume of heat exercise training (107), which may be
particularly useful when introducing unacclimatized athletes to heat
acclimation protocols.
1561
