overtraining and potential burnout (22, 47). Additionally, it seems
that late specialization and involvement in a variety of sports and
activities during the younger years may be better related to sporting
success at a later age (21, 72, 78, 96, 159). Although the total
elimination of youth sport injuries is an unrealistic goal, the addition
of resistance training as part of a long-term athletic development
program may better prepare the young athlete to handle the
duration and magnitude of unanticipated forces that develop in
practice and game situations (65, 106), whether or not they have
specialized. Because of individual differences in growth, maturation,
and stress tolerance, resistance training intensity, volume, and rate
of progression need to be carefully prescribed since this form of
training adds to the chronic repetitive stress placed on the
developing musculoskeletal system. Proper progression and program
variation will optimize gains, prevent boredom, and reduce the stress
that can lead to overtraining. This will be particularly effective when
practitioners use reliable data to help inform decision-making around
program design, and this evidence-informed approach will also work
well with those young athletes who have specialized (163).
Additionally, well-planned recovery strategies (e.g., proper cool-
down, postexercise meal or snack, and adequate sleep) can help to
maximize training adaptations.
Because many sports have a significant strength or power
component, it is attractive to assume that resistance training will
enhance athletic performance. Though comments from parents,
coaches, and children support this contention, scientific reports on
this issue are constrained by the ability to comprehensively define
and quantify “performance.” However, improvements in selected
motor performance skills, such as the long jump, vertical jump, 30-
meter (27 yd) sprint, and agility run, have been observed in children
who participated in a resistance training program of between 8 and
20 weeks (14, 40, 71, 135, 160, 187). Although direct evaluations of
the effects of youth resistance training on sport performance are
often based on proxy measures of performance, a progressive
410
