Self-Talk
A technique frequently used to enhance self-efficacy, aid in directing
proper focus, assist in regulating arousal levels, and reinforce
motivation is self-talk. Self-talk, or intrapersonal communication, is
the inner dialogue we have with ourselves (64). It is what we say to
ourselves, either out loud or in our heads, that provides the
soundtrack for our behaviors and performances.
Self-talk is generally categorized as positive, negative, or
instructional and can be either spontaneously generated or more
purposefully used to generate changes in mood or behaviors (61).
Positive self-talk can include utterances or statements that are
encouraging (e.g., “Come on!”), motivational (e.g., “I can do this!”),
or reinforcing (e.g., “I am ready!”) and generally reflects favorable
emotions or feelings. Negative self-talk generally reflects anger,
discouragement, doubt, or negative judgment (e.g., “You suck!” “You
can’t do this.” “What were you thinking?”). Instructional self-talk
generally provides specific direction or focus on necessary
performance cues for a particular skill or strategy (e.g., “Feet
shoulder-width apart.” “Keep your torso erect.”).
Positive and instructionally focused self-talk have been found to
improve performance in laboratory settings; however, significant
individual and environmental differences may modify these findings
in actual performance settings (61). For example, instructional self-
talk can be harmful for expert performers, because relaying specific
performance cues may actively interfere with the automaticity of the
movement. Furthermore, some evidence exists that positive self-talk
can result in decreased self-efficacy in some performers (72).
Generally, however, negative self-talk is associated with poor
performance, because it directs one’s focus to inappropriate cues,
can trigger negative emotional energy, and can decrease confidence.
Therefore, in order to employ self-talk most effectively, athletes
should begin by examining their current use of self-talk and its
effects on performance. Then, an assessment of the most
appropriate way to modify their self-talk can be made.
498
