Step 1: Needs Analysis
The strength and conditioning professional’s initial task is to perform a needs
analysis, a two-stage process that includes an evaluation of the requirements
and characteristics of the sport and an assessment of the athlete.
Evaluation of the Sport
The first task in a needs analysis is to determine the unique characteristics of
the sport, which includes the general physiological and biomechanical profile,
common injuries and mechanisms of injury, and position-specific attributes. This
information enables the strength and conditioning professional to design a
program specific to those requirements and characteristics. Although this task
can be approached in several ways, it should at least include consideration of
the following attributes of the sport (50, 128):
Body 
and 
limb 
movement 
patterns 
and 
muscular 
involvement
(movement analysis)
Strength, power, hypertrophy, and muscular endurance priorities
(physiological analysis)
Common sites for joint and muscle injury and causative factors (injury
analysis), especially for non-contact injuries
Other characteristics of a sport—such as cardiovascular endurance, speed,
agility, and flexibility requirements—should also be evaluated. This chapter,
however, focuses only on the physiological outcomes that specifically relate to
resistance training program design: strength, power, hypertrophy, and muscular
endurance.
For example, a movement analysis of the shot-put field event reveals that it is
an all-body movement that begins with the athlete in a semi-crouched stance,
with many joints flexed and adducted, and culminates in an upright stance with
many joints extended and abducted. The most heavily recruited muscles (not in
order) are the elbow extensors (triceps brachii), shoulder abductors (deltoids),
hip extensors (gluteals, hamstrings), knee extensors (quadriceps), and ankle
plantar flexors (soleus, gastrocnemius). Physiologically, shot putting requires
high levels of strength and power for a successful performance. Also, enhanced
muscular hypertrophy may be advantageous since the muscle’s potential to
produce force increases as its cross-sectional area becomes greater (81, 102).
The muscular endurance requirement is minimal, however. Due to the repetitive
nature of training and competition, the muscles and tendons surrounding the
shoulder and elbow joints tend to be injured due to overuse (192).
1195
