1. The starting position of this test will begin with the athlete lying prone on the ground with the
chest, hips, and legs touching the ground (figure 14.18a). Hands are flat on the ground (rather
than what is shown in the photo) with the index fingers inside of the shoulders. The feet
should be no more than one boot-width part, and the toes should be touching the ground.
2. The tester will begin the test on the command of “Go,” and the athlete must perform as many
push-ups as physically able in a 2-minute time period. The athlete should keep a straight line
from the ankles to the head (figure 14.18b). It is not permissible to flex the knees or hips or to
lift the feet off of the ground at any point during the test. After the athlete has fully extended
the arms, he or she should lower the body back to the ground, allowing the chest, hips, and
legs to contact the ground simultaneously. The tester should not count any repetitions in which
a straight alignment of the body from head to feet is not maintained.
3. At the point at which the athlete’s body comes back into contact with the ground, two variants
of this test are acceptable: the hand lift and the arm extension. If the hand lift variant is to be
performed, the athlete should lift both hands so as to create visible space between the palms
and the ground (figure 14.18c). The athlete should then return the hands to the starting
position and begin another repetition. With the arm extension variant, once the athlete’s body
has returned to the ground, the athlete will then extend the arms fully to form a 90-degree
angle between the arms and the torso (figure 14.18d). The athlete should then return to the
starting position and begin another repetition.
4. The athlete is not allowed to rest at any time during the test with the exception of the front
rest position, which consists of the top position of the push-up with the arms fully extended
and the body straight. If the tester observes that the athlete has remained motionless for more
than 5 seconds, the test should be discontinued and the repetitions performed to this point
counted as the athlete’s score for the test. The test will also be discontinued if the athlete lifts
a foot off of the ground or touches a knee to the ground. Any breakdown in technique such as
flexing the hips or knees should not be counted in the repetition total.
Note: AFT normative data for the hand-release push-up are presented in table 14.18 near the end
of the chapter.
FIGURE 14.18 (a) Beginning position (but with the hands on the ground instead), (b) up position, (c) hand lift variant, and (d)
arm extension variant of the hand-release push-up.
798
