The mechanism to explain endurance improvements is unclear.
One of the mechanisms that has been proposed involves an increase
in fat oxidation through the mobilization of free fatty acids from
adipose tissue or intramuscular fat stores (90). The greater use of
fat as a primary energy source slows glycogen depletion and delays
fatigue. Alterations in muscle metabolism alone cannot fully explain
the ergogenic effect of caffeine. During short-duration, high-intensity
exercise, the primary ergogenic effect attributed to caffeine
supplementation is enhanced power production. This is thought to
be the result of an enhanced excitation–contraction coupling,
affecting 
neuromuscular 
transmission 
and 
mobilization 
of
intracellular calcium ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (90).
Efficacy
For the aerobic athlete, caffeine is thought to prolong aerobic
endurance exercise (221). Initial studies dealing with the effect of
caffeine supplementation on aerobic endurance performance
indicated a 21-minute improvement in the time to exhaustion (from
75 min in a placebo trial to 96 min in the caffeine trial) during
cycling at 80% of V̇ O2max (49). These results were confirmed by
other investigations demonstrating the ergogenic effect of caffeine
during prolonged aerobic endurance activity (17). These studies
showed that caffeine in doses ranging from 3 to 9 milligrams per
kilogram (equivalent to approximately 1.5 to 3.5 cups of automatic
drip coffee in a 70 kg [154 lb] person) produced a significant
ergogenic effect. Similar performance effects from caffeine have also
been demonstrated during short-duration, high-intensity exercise
(34, 58).
When the effects of caffeine ingestion on sprint or power
performance are examined, however, the ergogenic benefits become
less clear. Several studies have shown that caffeine ingestion does
not improve power performance (46, 96), but those studies used
recreational athletes. In elite judo athletes ingesting caffeine (5
mg/kg), it was reported that peak power was significantly improved
in comparison with a placebo treatment (194).
719
