control of the bar improperly, too soon, or too late and consequently
disrupt the exercise or injure the athlete.
Use of a Liftoff
The term liftoff refers to moving the bar from the upright supports
to a position in which the athlete can begin the exercise. Usually the
spotter helps place the barbell or dumbbells into the athlete’s hands
while the elbows are extended and helps to move the barbell or
dumbbells to the proper starting position. Some athletes may want
the spotter to provide a liftoff; others do not. If a liftoff is needed or
requested, the athlete and spotter need to agree in advance on a
verbal signal (e.g., the command “up” or “I will give it to you on the
count of three”). Typically, the athlete signals that he or she is
ready; the spotter says, “One, two, three,” and on “three” the bar is
moved into position. Liftoffs are normally used in the bench press
(off the supports), shoulder press (off the supports or the
shoulders), and squatting exercises if the supports are too low and
nonadjustable. When two spotters are involved and the athlete
wants a liftoff, as with a bench press, one spotter should assist with
the liftoff and then quickly move to the end of the bar to spot (the
other spotter is already at the other end). The spotter providing the
liftoff must be sure that the athlete has complete control of the bar
at the conclusion of the liftoff. If two spotters are used, both should
help the athlete place the bar back onto the supports on completion
of the exercise.
Amount and Timing of Spotting Assistance
Knowing how much and when to help an athlete is an important
aspect of spotting, and it requires the spotter to be experienced in
proper spotting techniques. Most athletes typically need just enough
help to successfully complete a repetition through a sticking point
(i.e., a partner-assisted action); other times they might need the
spotter to handle the entire load. At the first indication that a
repetition will be missed, the athlete should quickly ask or signal the
960
