Equipment
Minimum space needed
Treadmill
53 ft2 (4.9 m2)
Adapted by permission from B. Kroll, “Structural and Functional Considerations in
Designing the Facility: Part I,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 13,
no. 1 (1991): 51-58, with updates made to comply with ADA Standards for Accessible
Design (United States Department of Justice, 2010), 104-116, 224-252.
Indoor Sprint Track and Turf Lanes
Indoor track and turf lanes are beneficial for incorporating
plyometric, speed, and agility training. These surfaces also can be
used to implement warm-up and dynamic movement programs with
athletes. When track and turf lanes are incorporated within training
facilities, in proximity to other strength and conditioning equipment,
special considerations should be taken to enhance safety and reduce
the risk of injury and liability concerns.
Based on the specific needs and training goals, sideline, distance,
and running lane markings should be considered to optimize session
management and athlete instruction. Track and turf lanes should
remain clear of unnecessary equipment to avoid tripping and other
injury. Considering how many athletes will be using the turf and
track lanes simultaneously is essential to identifying space
requirements.
The length of track and turf lanes will determine the ability to
administer certain assessments. For example, a 20-meter (22 yd)
track lane would not be suitable to perform the Yo-Yo intermittent
recovery test due to the added 5 meters (5.5 yd) of length required
for jogging recovery between test intervals. Also, the amount of
space required at the ends of the track or turf lanes to allow for
deceleration is an important safety consideration. Determining the
amount of space needed to decelerate will depend on the
demographic and skill level of those being trained. While it is
common for padding to be installed on back-end walls to prevent
injury, it is best to avoid unnecessary collisions with an adequate
space allowance.
1756
