of fatigue over the subsequent 24 hours, which should be carefully considered in
relation to the additional training planned for that period. As such, this also
highlights a limitation of the RIR approach, in that it has been clearly
demonstrated that the further away from failure, the less accurate the RIR
approach is (6, 70).
Training Status
The training status of athletes affects the volume they will be able to safely
tolerate. It is appropriate for an athlete to perform only 1 or 2 sets as a beginner
and to add sets as he or she becomes better trained. As the athlete adapts to a
consistent and well-designed program, more sets can be added gradually to
match the guidelines associated with the given training goal.
Primary Resistance Training Goal
Training volume is directly based on the athlete’s resistance training goal. Table
18.13 provides a summary of the guidelines for the number of repetitions and
sets commonly associated with strength, power, hypertrophy, and muscular
endurance training programs. When programming weightlifting exercises and
their derivatives, loads and the associated repetition schemes may vary from
other forms of power training, because weightlifting pulling derivatives (i.e.,
those that exclude the catch phase) permit loads greater than the 1RM
associated with the catching variation (21). In addition, reduced displacement
during some of these exercises (i.e., countermovement shrug, hang pull, power
clean) also permits the performance of 6 repetitions without decreases in
velocity of power across repetitions (113, 114) (table 18.14).
TABLE 18.13 Volume Assignments Based on the Training Goal
Training
goal
Goal repetitions
Setsa
NOVICE
INTERMEDIATE
ADVANCED
NOVICE
INTERMEDIATE
ADVANCED
Strength
≤6
≤6
≤6
1-3
≥3
≥3
Power: b
n/a
1-3
1-3
n/a
1-3
3-6
aThese assignments do not include warm-up sets and typically apply to core exercises only.
bBased on weightlifting movements (clean, snatch, jerk) and their derivatives. The load and repetition
assignments shown for power in this table are not consistent with the %1RM–repetition relationship. In
nonexplosive movements, loads equaling about 80% of the 1RM apply to the 2- to 5-repetition range.
Refer to the discussion of assigning percentages of the 1RM for power training for further explanation.
cA higher number of repetitions may be performed without changes in velocity or power if the range of
motion and complexity is reduced (113, 114), or if cluster sets are used.
dA low number of repetitions for hypertrophy should be mixed with a higher number of sets (e.g., 10 sets
of 3 repetitions).
Data from Fleck and Kraemer (2014); Stone and O’Bryant (1987); Tesch (1992).
1248
