When one is designing a dynamic stretching program, the starting
point should be a careful analysis of the major movement patterns
within the given sport as well as an analysis of fundamental
movement patterns that can facilitate performance and the ROM
required within these movements. One can then select exercises that
replicate those movements via a series of dynamic stretches. In this
way, it is possible to achieve a highly specific flexibility program.
Dynamic stretching also provides the opportunity to combine
movements (48). This gives the strength and conditioning
professional a large number of combinations that can be used to
provide variety in the warm-up. Athletes can perform dynamic
stretching exercises either for a series of repetitions in the same
place (e.g., 10 lunges) or for a series of repetitions to cover a given
distance (e.g., lunge for 15 m [16 yd]). Regardless of the method
chosen, each drill should start at an appropriate ROM and gradually
increase this during subsequent repetitions or sets. Additionally, the
speed of movement can also be increased but always under a high
level of control. For example, athletes can perform the knee lift
exercise over a distance of 15 meters, starting at a walk and building
to a skip in subsequent repetitions.
In a dynamic stretch that mirrors a sport skill—such as a sprinter’s
knee lift drill—it is important that the stretch also emphasize the key
skill factors required for the movement so that the most important
mechanics of the drill are reinforced. For example, if the knee lift
drill is used in the warm-up, effective body mechanics should be
emphasized along with key joint positions such as dorsiflexion of the
ankle of the lifted foot. The use of dynamic stretches must always be
coordinated 
with 
appropriate 
sport 
techniques 
and 
never
compromise proper technique.
A ballistic stretch can be considered a special type of dynamic
stretch. Ballistic stretches similarly involve active muscular efforts,
but rather than performing these under control, they instead use
intense bouncing-type movements to achieve the required ROM
(66). Ballistic stretching, if not appropriately controlled or
881
