when volume is matched (140). Furthermore, it has been reported that there are
no differences in hypertrophic adaptations following low (<60% 1RM) or high
(>60% 1RM) load training programs (141). Thus, it is important that strength
and conditioning professionals understand that heavy loads (i.e., >80% 1RM)
can be used to train muscle hypertrophy rather than only maximal strength
characteristics. In fact, the use of heavier loads may target specific fibers and
higher threshold motor units (i.e., type II) to a greater extent than lighter loads
(82, 106, 158), which in turn may allow for greater force, rapid force, and power
output adaptations in future training blocks (187). Thus, it has been suggested
that using heavier loads to target hypertrophic adaptations may be more
beneficial to strength and power athletes (53, 97). However, it is also important
to adjust the number of sets and repetitions compared to traditional hypertrophy
prescription; for example, strength and conditioning professionals could
prescribe 10 sets of 3 repetitions when using heavier loads compared to the
more traditional 3 sets of 10 repetitions typically prescribed when targeting
hypertrophy. Moreover, caution should be taken when prescribing training in this
manner because the volume–loads can be quite high and the time it may take to
complete a given exercise with proper rest periods between sets may lead to
lengthy training sessions. Therefore, it is suggested that users do not implement
this set and repetitions scheme with every exercise.
Muscular Endurance
Resistance training programs that emphasize muscular endurance involve
performing many repetitions—12 or more—per set (160, 161). Despite this
relatively high repetition assignment, the overall volume–load is not necessarily
overly inflated since the loads lifted are lighter and fewer sets are performed,
commonly 2 or 3 per exercise.
Application of the Volume Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528 for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball player
In-season
Scenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-season
Scenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
Power exercises  3 sets of 3 reps
Other core  3 sets of 4 reps exercises
Assistance  2 sets of 8 reps exercises
(The number of sets does not include
warm-ups.)
Core exercises  3 sets of 10
  reps
Assistance  3 sets of 10
exercises  reps
(The number of sets does not
include warm-ups.)
Core exercises  3 sets of 12
  reps
Assistance  2 sets of 15
exercises   reps
(The number of sets does not
include warm-ups.)
1251
