However, for beginner athletes who start with a very low training
volume, it may be safe and logical to increase by more than 10%.
For example, an athlete who is new to running may run 1 mile (1.6
km) three times in their first week. By following the 10%
recommendation, the following week would realize an increase of
only a total of 0.3 miles (0.5 km), whereas the athlete should
logically be able to absorb more than this—in this case, an additional
0.5 miles (0.8 km) on two separate days (i.e., a total of 1 mile [1.6
km] or 33% increase). Similarly, cyclists, by the nature of the
volume of training they engage in as well as the low-impact nature
of their sport, may be able to safely increase their volume by more
than 10%. For example, a beginner cyclist may complete an average
of 25 miles (40 km) in a week. The recommendation would mean
the following week they would increase their volume by a total of
1.25 to 2.5 miles (2-4 km). If this athlete is training at an average
speed of 10 miles per hour (16 km/h), this volume would equate to
an additional 7.5 to 15 minutes, which in both absolute and relative
terms is small. However, it is also important to consider that training
is progressed across many weeks in a training program, and even
small changes on a week-to-week basis will eventually add up to
substantial increases in volume or intensity. Therefore, while an
initial increase in volume of >10% may be advisable in some,
continued increases across a training program of more than 5% to
10% per week may create a substantial training stress that exceeds
an athlete’s maximal tolerable dosage, particularly as the stress from
training accumulates across the training program. Aside from
background and training status, individual differences in response to
training volume stimuli should also be taken into account. To avoid
injury and optimize training adaptations, some athletes will require
more recovery time, including a slower increase in training volume,
than their peers. Monitoring subjective levels of fatigue and
soreness, and objective measures such as resting heart rate and
heart rate variability, can help guide appropriate increases in training
volume. It should also be noted that increasing training duration too
1545
