Blood Doping
The practice of artificially increasing red blood cell mass (blood
doping) as a means to improve athletic performance has been
criticized as unethical and as one that poses serious health risks to
the athlete (120). Nonetheless, research has suggested that this
practice can improve aerobic exercise performance and may enhance
tolerance of certain environmental conditions (138).
Blood doping can be accomplished through infusion of an
individual’s own red blood cells or those from someone else, or
through administration of EPO, which stimulates red blood cell
production. Infusion of red blood cells rapidly increases red blood
cell mass but for just a few weeks (116), whereas EPO takes longer
to cause an increase in red blood cell production but the effect lasts
as long as EPO is administered (138). In either case, it is theorized
that increasing red blood cell mass increases the blood’s ability to
carry oxygen and thus increases oxygen availability to working
muscles. Maximal oxygen uptake has been demonstrated to increase
by up to 11% with either red blood cell infusion or EPO
administration (138, 139). At standardized submaximal workloads,
blood doping has also been associated with decreased heart rate
and blood lactate as well as higher pH values (138).
The effects of blood doping suggest the potential for diminishing
the impact of various environmental conditions. The effects of
altitude appear to be lessened with blood doping, although as
altitude increases, the positive influence of blood doping is reduced
(132). Environmental stressors such as heat and cold exposure may
also be affected by blood doping. During heat exposure, a blood-
doped athlete will be able to tolerate submaximal exercise stress
more easily (76, 137-139). The increased blood volume associated
with increased red blood cell mass allows the body to shunt more
blood to the skin for improved thermoregulation while still providing
sufficient blood to transport oxygen to the working muscles.
However, blood doping appears to confer these benefits primarily to
individuals who are already acclimatized to heat and provides very
377
