air resistance.) The phenomenon has become important in
resistance training with the advent of hydraulic (liquid) and
pneumatic (gas) exercise machines and with the increasing
popularity of swimming pool exercise routines, particularly among
older people and pregnant women. The two sources of fluid
resistance are surface drag, which results from the friction of a
fluid passing along the surface of an object, and form drag, which
results from the way in which a fluid presses against the front or
rear of an object passing through it. Cross-sectional (frontal) area
has a major effect on form drag.
Fluid-resisted exercise machines most often use cylinders in which
a piston forces fluid through an opening as the exercise movement is
performed. The resistive force is greater when the piston is pushed
faster, when the opening is smaller, or when the fluid is more
viscous. All else being equal, resistance is roughly proportional to the
velocity of piston movement:
  FR = k × v    (2.10)
where FR is the resistive force; k is a constant that reflects the
physical characteristics of the cylinder and piston, the viscosity of the
fluid, and the number, size, and shape of the openings; and v is
piston velocity relative to the cylinder.
Because fluid cylinders provide resistance that increases with
velocity, they allow an initial rapid acceleration that decreases at
higher velocities. Movement velocity is thus kept within an
intermediate range. Although such machines limit changes in velocity
to a certain extent, they are not isokinetic (constant velocity) as is
sometimes claimed. Some machines have adjustment knobs that
enable the opening size to be changed. A larger opening enables the
user to reach a higher movement velocity before the fluid-resistive
force curtails the ability to accelerate.
Fluid-resisted machines do not generally provide an eccentric
exercise phase, but they may if they incorporate an internal pump.
With a free weight, the agonist muscle group acts concentrically
158
