trained, sub-elite rugby players. While both groups tended to report
improvements in strength and functional performance measures
(0.2%-7%), no significant differences were observed between
groups. This would indicate that strongman training can be equally
as effective as traditional training and that its use might provide
additional variety and interest to highly experienced resistance-
trained athletes who may benefit from more variations in their
training stimulus.
Heavy sled pulls have also been the focus of some training studies
(96, 157). For example, the training study by Winwood and
colleagues (157) attempted to match strongman to traditional
resistance training exercises. One example was the use of heavy sled
pulls with 85% of the athlete’s 1RM back squat for 3 sets of 25
meters (27 yd). Morin and colleagues (96) have also compared eight
weeks of heavy sled sprint training (10 × 20 m [22 yd] sprints per
session with 80% of body mass) to a control group performing
unresisted sprinting on sprinting performance. Heavy sled training
produced a range of moderate effect size improvements in horizontal
force production and 5-meter (5 yd) sprint performance, with effect
sizes indicating that heavy sled training had small to moderate
benefits when compared to traditional sprinting. Further, a meta-
analysis including 13 studies demonstrated the effectiveness of
resisted sled training with a range of loads (5%-80% body mass) for
improving acceleration (up to 10 m [11 yd]) but not maximum-
velocity sprint performance (3), with no clear indication of what
constitutes the most effective loads.
The effect of tire flipping has also been examined in one study
(162), whereby 29 physically active males performed 4 sets of 6
repetitions with either lighter (43 kg [95 lb]) or heavier (104 kg [229
lb]) tires for two sessions per week for 8 weeks. Both groups
significantly improved 6RM bench press, intermittent endurance, five
horizontal jumps and change-of-direction ability, with no significant
between-group differences in these responses. Neither group
1121
