Step 3: Training Frequency
Training frequency refers to the number of training sessions completed in a
given time period. For a resistance training program, a common time period is
one week. When determining training frequency, the strength and conditioning
professional should consider the athlete’s training status, sport season, projected
exercise loads, types of exercises, and other concurrent training or activities.
When the weekly resistance training volume–load is equated, hypertrophic
adaptations (142) and strength adaptations (34) are comparable irrespective of
training frequency.
Training Status
The athlete’s level of preparedness for training, which was determined during
the needs analysis (step 1), is an influential factor in determining training
frequency because it affects the number of rest days needed between training
sessions. Traditionally, three workouts per week are recommended for many
athletes, because the intervening days allow sufficient recovery between
sessions. As an athlete adapts to training and becomes better conditioned, it is
appropriate to consider increasing the number of training days to four and, with
additional training, maybe five, six, or seven (table 18.4), although this depends
on the phase of the competitive cycle. The general guideline is to schedule
training sessions to include at least one rest or recovery day—but not more than
three—between sessions that stress the same muscle groups (77); however, this
may also depend on the intensity of the prescribed exercises. For example, if a
strength and conditioning professional wants a novice athlete to perform a total
body resistance training program two times per week, the sessions should be
spaced out evenly (e.g., Monday and Thursday or Tuesday and Friday). If the
athlete trains only on Monday and Wednesday, the absence of a training
stimulus between Wednesday and the following Monday may result in a
decrease in the athlete’s training status (41, 61, 77), although, for a short time
in well-trained athletes, one session per week can maintain strength if
appropriate loading strategies are implemented (41, 61). Examples of training
frequencies of 3 and 4 times per week using a total body push–pull format are
presented in table 18.5.
TABLE 18.4 Resistance Training Frequency Based on Training
Status
1212
