The potential for residual force enhancement through CNS
stimulation has been attributed to a range of physiological
mechanisms, including the phosphorylation of myosin light chains,
pennation angle changes in a muscle, recruitment of higher
threshold motor units, and enhancement of the H-wave amplitude
(91). It has also been suggested that PAPE could be attributed to an
increase in the quantity of neurotransmitters released and their
efficiency, resulting in enhanced muscle contractions together with
an elevation in excitation potentials across synaptic junctions at the
spinal cord (40, 91). However, no definitive answer emerges as to
the mechanisms by which PAPE is elicited, and with so many
potential contributory mechanisms, it is expected that there will be
great variation in both the optimal stimulus and the probable
response of an individual to any protocol. This potential individuality
of response is made more probable by the fact that the
preconditioning activity does not only have the potential to generate
PAPE; it also has the potential to generate fatigue (the fitness
fatigue theory). This balance between potentiation and fatigue must
always be kept in mind when designing PAPE-based activities—
indeed, throughout the design of a warm-up.
A range of modalities have been purported as having the potential
to stimulate PAPE, including resistance training exercises, variable
resistance exercise, isometric contractions, resisted sprinting, and
assisted sprinting (72), with the majority of modalities reporting
subsequent effects of sprint and/or jump performance (55). Most
research into PAPE has focused on the use of heavy resistance
exercise, predominantly at intensities of between 60% and 90%
1RM and using exercises such as the back squat. Similarly, the use
of isometric muscle actions at a range of positions has been
investigated. However, the challenge of this modality is its
application given the necessity for equipment and the associated
time to get athletes through the protocols. As a result, a more recent
focus has been on the use of activities that are potentially more
applicable such as resisted sprinting and plyometrics.
868
