consider movement velocity, where how quickly a movement is
performed is of interest. Furthermore, although the word strength is
often associated with slow velocities and the word power with high
velocities of movement, both variables reflect the ability to exert
force at a given velocity. Power is a direct mathematical function of
force and velocity (which is why it becomes a scalar quantity).
Earlier we saw that impulse is directly proportional to a change in
velocity, providing a cause and effect. Therefore, it is not correct to
associate strength with low speed and power with high speed.
Strength is the capacity to exert force, and the amount of force we
can apply over given time periods dictates how quickly the object
this force is being applied to will move. If we need to move the
object more quickly, we have to apply more impulse, and the
constituent parts of the impulse equation that we change will be
dictated by task demands and performance constraints (e.g., time).
Where time is constrained, this means applying more force to
balance this, and then if we need to move faster but cannot change
the time constraint, this will mean developing the capacity to apply
even more force during this time period. What is critical is the ability
to exert force at velocities characteristic of a given sport to
overcome gravity and accelerate the body or an implement. For a
sport movement made relatively slow by high resistance, low-
velocity strength is critical, whereas for a movement that is very fast
due to low resistance, high-velocity strength is important. For
example, when offensive and defensive American football linemen
push against each other, their velocity of movement is slowed by the
muscular force exerted by the opposing player as well as the inertia
of the opposing player’s body mass. Because the muscles are
prevented from contracting at high velocity, the ability to exert force
and power at low velocity is an important component of
performance. In contrast, a badminton athlete’s muscles quickly
reach high velocity as a result of the minimal inertial resistance of
the lightweight racket and the athlete’s arm. Therefore, the ability to
138
