Vertical jumping (plyometric,
fast SSC)
Drop jump, rebound jump, standing calf raise, seated calf raise
Racket stroke
Flat dumbbell fly, lunge, bent-over lateral raise, wrist curl, wrist extension
Rowing
Power clean, clean pull, snatch pull, hang high pull, bent-over row, seated
row, back squat, leg press, deadlift, stiff-leg deadlift, good morning
Running, sprinting
Snatch, clean, power clean, back squat, front squat, forward step lunge,
step-up, leg (knee) extension, leg (knee) curl, toe raise (dorsiflexion)
Throwing, pitching
Lunge, single-leg squat, barbell pullover, overhead triceps extension,
shoulder internal and external rotation
Muscle Balance
Exercises selected for the specific demands of the sport should maintain a
balance of muscular strength across joints and between opposing muscle groups
(e.g., biceps brachii and triceps brachii). Avoid designing a resistance training
program that increases the risk of injury due to a disparity between the strength
of the agonist, the muscle or muscle group actively causing the movement
(e.g., the quadriceps in the leg [knee] extension exercise), and the antagonist,
the sometimes passive (i.e., not concentrically involved) muscle or muscle group
located on the opposite side of the limb (e.g., the hamstrings in the leg [knee]
extension exercise). If an imbalance is created or discovered, exercises to
restore an appropriate strength balance need to be selected. For example, if
isokinetic testing reveals that the hamstrings are extremely weak compared with
the quadriceps, additional hamstring exercises could be included to compensate
for the imbalance (48). Isokinetic adaptations may be specific to the muscle
actions involved as well as the speeds used during the training protocols (31,
129) and do not transfer effectively to enhanced performance in athletic tasks
(94, 122). Note that muscle balance does not always mean equal strength,
just a proper ratio of strength, power, or muscular endurance of one muscle or
muscle group relative to another muscle or muscle group.
Exercise Technique Experience
An important part of the needs analysis described earlier is evaluating the
athlete’s training status and exercise technique. If there is any question whether
an athlete can perform an exercise with proper technique, the strength and
conditioning professional should ask the athlete to demonstrate the exercise. If
the athlete uses incorrect technique, the strength and conditioning professional
should provide complete instruction. Often, unskilled individuals are introduced
to machines and free weight assistance exercises because these are considered
easier to perform than free weight core exercises due to their lower balance and
coordination requirements (146, 147). Despite this, one should not assume that
1208
