strength as the goal (e.g., Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays). It would be
difficult for the athlete to perform the same high-load, low-volume regimen—
especially in the power and other core exercises—with only one or two days of
rest between sessions. As noted previously, training to failure may not be
necessary to promote the desired training adaptations (36, 63, 137, 191).
One strategy to counterbalance the monotony associated with lifting heavy
loads is to alter the loads (%1RMs) for the power and other core exercises so
that only one training day each week (e.g., Monday) is a heavy day. These
heavy-day loads are designed to be high but usually with 1 to 2 RIR to avoid
training to failure. The loads for the other training days are reduced
(intentionally) to avoid an excessive accumulation of fatigue after the heavy day
while still maintaining sufficient training frequency and volume. In the example
of the three-days-a-week program, Wednesday can still serve as another heavy
training day (depending on the organization of workouts) (table 18.5, page 538),
while Friday may serve as the light day of the week in which 80% of the loads
lifted in the power and other core exercises on the heavy day (Monday) are
performed with the same number of goal repetitions. Even if the athlete is able
to perform more repetitions than the designated goal number, he or she should
not do so. This approach can be used for any training frequency. For instance, a
two-days-a-week program could have a heavy day and a light day, or a lower
body–upper body split routine could consist of two heavy days (one lower body
day and one upper body day) followed by two lighter days. Varying the training
loads also works well with an athlete’s other training, in that heavy lifting days
can fall on light sport conditioning days, and light lifting days on heavy sport
conditioning days (42). The strength and conditioning professional needs to
monitor this schedule so that it does not lead to heavy training every day.
Progression of Load
As the athlete adapts to the training stimulus, the strength and conditioning
professional needs to have a strategy for advancing exercise loads (intensity or
volume depending on the specific goal) so that improvements will continue over
time (progression). Monitoring each athlete’s training and charting his or her
response to the prescribed workouts enable the strength and conditioning
professional to know when and to what extent the loads should be increased.
Timing Load Increases
A conservative method that can be used to increase an athlete’s training loads is
called the 2-for-2 rule (2). If the athlete can perform 2 or more repetitions
over his or her assigned repetition goal for a given exercise in the last set in two
consecutive workouts, weight should be added to that exercise for the next
1241
