aerobic endurance exercise, for example, a hybrid I/IIa fiber could
transform to a type I fiber (110). This scenario was highlighted by
Trappe and colleagues (157), who examined the impact of aerobic
endurance training on muscle fiber adaptations in runners
participating in a 16-week marathon training study including a 3-
week taper and marathon. The results showed approximately a 50%
decline in the percentage of hybrid fibers and an increase in the
percentage of type I fibers in the gastrocnemius muscle. While our
understanding of how hybrid fibers in humans adapt to various
training environments is still evolving, we do know that hybrid fibers
in aerobic endurance runners are influenced by training volume, and
the content of hybrid fibers (i.e., distribution of MHC isoforms)
differs between longer- versus shorter-distance runners (80).
Further, 
the 
abovementioned 
conversions 
following 
aerobic
endurance training, whether within fiber type or from hybrid fibers,
results in a more oxidative phenotype of the muscle that contributes
to improved aerobic endurance performance.
At the cellular level, muscular adaptations to aerobic exercise
include an increase in the size and number of mitochondria (68) and
increased myoglobin content (26, 64). Myoglobin is a protein that
transports oxygen within the cell. Mitochondria are the organelles
in cells that are responsible for aerobically producing adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) via oxidation of pyruvate and lactate (the
products of glycolysis) and free fatty acids. When the larger and
more numerous mitochondria are combined with an increase in the
quantity of oxygen that can be delivered to mitochondria by the
greater concentration of myoglobin, the capacity of the muscle tissue
to extract and use oxygen is enhanced. This adaptation is further
augmented by increases in the level and activity of the enzymes
involved in oxidative metabolism (73) and a parallel increase in
glycogen (51, 53) and triglyceride (113) stores. Also worth noting is
that aerobic endurance training can spare muscle glycogen (less
glycogen use during exercise) and increase fat use within the
muscle, which helps prolong performance at the same exercise
348
