exercise, with the athlete able to talk without undue respiratory
distress, or at a speed that the athlete feels they could run
indefinitely. In general, increases in duration are prioritized when
programming extensive endurance training sessions into a training
program. It is important to not substantially increase the speed of
the extensive endurance sessions in combination with increases in
session duration, for as speed increases the stress of the session
also increases, which in turn lengthens the posttraining recovery
time and therefore can also increase the risk of overtraining or
injury. The physiological benefits derived from extensive endurance
training 
primarily 
include 
enhanced 
cardiovascular 
and
thermoregulatory 
function, 
improved 
mitochondrial 
energy
production and oxidative capacity of skeletal muscle, and increased
use of fat as a fuel (15, 20, 64, 75, 83, 85, 96, 104, 136, 140, 142).
These changes are likely to improve the LT intensity by enhancing
the body’s ability to clear lactate. Chronic use of this type of training
also causes a change in the metabolic characteristics of the involved
muscles (27) and an eventual shift of type IIx fibers to type I fibers
(103, 124).
The increase in fat use also causes a sparing of the body’s limited
muscle glycogen reserves (60, 64, 69, 136). The intensity during
extensive endurance training is lower than the intensity used during
competition. However, extensive endurance training does not
stimulate the neurological patterns of muscle fiber recruitment that
are required during a race (136), and this may result in adaptations
in muscle fibers that are not used during competition.
Aerobic endurance training should not be based solely on
extensive endurance training but be combined with other training
methods such as interval and pace/tempo training to train race pace
endurance, and improve LT and exercise economy, thereby ensuring
a complete aerobic endurance-trained athlete. Even elite distance
running athletes recognize the benefit of this practice, running
approximately 80% of total running distance at extensive endurance
pace over the training year but also incorporating various other
1538
