neurophysiological adaptations from previous practices would bolster
subsequent training. In an effort to either enhance the force
required or target potential neuromuscular adaptations for sprinting
improvement, resisted and assisted sprint training techniques are
often employed (i.e., secondary methods). The proposed benefits,
potential drawbacks, and coaching considerations are outlined in
table 20.2.
Strength
As noted throughout the chapter, sprint speed is underpinned by an
athlete’s ability to produce large forces within brief time periods.
These forces must be large enough to support the body weight in
the presence of gravity and displace the body through an increase in
velocity (62). Thus, many strength and conditioning professionals
are aware of the importance of resistance training in the
development of a sprint-based athlete. Central to the discussion of
resistance training is how best to transfer newly developed strength
qualities from the weight room to the track or field (109). The
transfer of strength improvements to sprinting may require an
emphasis 
on 
the 
specificity 
of 
training 
(i.e., 
dynamic
correspondence and coordinative overload). This transfer of
training effect deals with the degree of performance adaptation and
may result from the similarities between the movement patterns,
peak force, RFD, acceleration, and velocity patterns of an exercise
and the sporting environment (98).
While training for maximal strength may be beneficial, training
should emphasize agendas that merge maximal strength and speed–
strength qualities instead (44). The selection of exercises and
movements that provide opportunities to display forces and
velocities like those found in sprinting may have the most benefit
with regard to enhancing rate coding and firing frequency, alongside
alterations to type II muscle fibers such as cross-sectional area and
fascicle length (40, 43). For instance, evidence suggests that
weightlifting movements and their derivatives such as the clean,
1431
