gradually increases the intensity of the stretch by leaning forward
until he or she feels mild discomfort in the hamstrings or lower back.
The athlete holds this position for 10 to 30 seconds and then slowly
returns to an upright sitting position. The stretch is static because it
is performed slowly and the end position is held without movement.
Dynamic Stretching
Dynamic stretching is a broad term used to describe actions that
involve active motions where a performer moves actively in a
controlled and moderate paced manner through a typically large
ROM (66). Often this approach is used as a type of functionally
based stretching exercise that uses sport-generic and sport-specific
movements to prepare the body for activity (48). Dynamic stretching
—sometimes referred to as mobility drills (3)—places an emphasis
on the movement requirements of the sport or activity rather than
on individual muscles. This type of exercise can closely duplicate the
movement requirements of a sport or activity (48); for example, a
walking knee lift stretch mimics the knee lift of a sprinter.
The ability to actively move a joint through a ROM is generally far
more sport specific than the ability to statically hold a stretch.
Advantages of dynamic stretching include the ability to promote
mobility and to replicate the movement patterns and ROM required
for sport activities. As a consequence, dynamic stretches, as outlined
in the discussion of warm-up, are increasingly the preferred method
of increasing the ROM during warm-up.
In dynamic stretching, unlike static stretching, the muscle does
not relax during the stretch but instead is active through the ROM;
this is also more specific to the movement patterns that occur in
sport. Even though it is an ideal warm-up activity, dynamic
stretching may be less effective than static or proprioceptive
neuromuscular facilitation stretching at increasing static ROM (71);
in situations in which an increased static ROM is needed, static or
proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation methods may be preferred.
880
