Variation within resistance training programs focuses on removing linearity
by manipulating overload and specificity to promote the desired adaptations. For
example, strength and conditioning professionals may introduce variation into a
training program by modifying volume, intensity, set configuration, rest periods,
and exercise selection to provide a novel overload stimulus. These modifications
to a training program may help reduce training monotony while also potentially
reducing fatigue and providing a range of training stimuli. Regarding training
intensity, strength–power characteristics have been developed within training
programs that include more variation compared to prescribing constant
repetition ranges with a greater or fewer number of sets and training or not
training to failure (121, 195, 196). Moreover, it has been suggested that maximal
and rapid force production may be improved to a greater extent using a
combination of heavy and light training intensities compared to performing only
one loading method (68, 118, 189).
Strength and conditioning professionals can add variation to a training
program at both the macro and micro level in several ways. At the macro level,
implementing a periodized training plan may help develop specific fitness
characteristics (e.g., hypertrophy, strength, and power) at different times
throughout the training year. This in turn may provide athletes with a variety of
training stimuli and potentially enhance the adaptations in subsequent training
phases. Within each phase of training strength and conditioning professionals
can make micro-level adjustments and add variation by modifying training
intensities and exercise selection, thereby reducing training monotony and
offering unique training stimuli.
As mentioned previously, the introduction of an overload stimulus is meant to
promote the development of a desired fitness characteristic. However, the
removal or reduction of a training stimulus or the involution from monotonous
training and poor fatigue management may cause the opposite to occur; this
deterioration or loss of fitness characteristics refers to the principle of
reversibility. An example of the deterioration of a fitness characteristic after
the removal of a training stimulus is the reduction in rapid force production that
may occur during a higher volume phase focused on improving muscle
hypertrophy (98, 164). However, the opposite may also occur because a loss in
muscle size (i.e., muscle atrophy) may occur when training volume is reduced
during a taper (7, 188). As such, reversibility may be considered a product of
programming variation because different fitness characteristics are emphasized
during various times throughout the training year. Regarding involution, a
plateau or decreased performance may result because of a lack of mechanical
variation (52) or appropriate loading (176). For example, maximal strength
adaptations may plateau if a similar training program with small progressions in
1191
