6 sets of 8-20 repetitions).
Basic Strength Phase
In the later portion of the preparatory period, during the specific preparatory
phase, the primary aim of the basic strength phase is to increase the strength
of the muscles that are essential to the primary sport movements (12-14). For
example, the sprinter’s running program would progress to include interval sprints
of a moderate distance and more complex and specialized plyometric drills. The
resistance training program also becomes more specific to the sport (e.g., squat,
power clean, Bulgarian squat) and involves heavier loads performed at lower
volumes than in the hypertrophy or strength–endurance phase (table 22.3). As
with the hypertrophy or strength–endurance phase, daily variations in training
load facilitate recovery (35, 38).
The basic strength phase involves higher intensity (80%-95% of
the 1RM) and moderate to high volumes (2 to 6 sets of 2 to 6
repetitions).
First Transition Period
As originally described by Stone and colleagues (89-91), the first transition
period is a link between the preparatory and competitive periods. Classically, the
resistance training in this period focuses on the development of strength and
power as noted in Stone, O’Bryant, and Garhammer’s (89) seminal paper on the
periodization of strength training. The central aim of this period is to shift the
training focus toward the elevation of strength and its translation into power
development (89, 90). In order to maximize this process and facilitate recovery,
variations are observed in training intensity and workload at the microcycle level
(35, 38). Additionally, the last week of the period is marked by reduced volume,
intensity, or both to achieve recovery before the beginning of the competitive
period.
The main phase within the first transition period is the strength/power
phase. In this phase, for example, the sprinter’s interval and speed training
intensifies to near competitive pace; speed drills are performed (e.g., sled towing,
sprints against resistance, and uphill sprints); plyometric drills mimic sprinting;
and the resistance training program involves performing power and explosive
exercises at low to very high loads with low volumes. As explained in chapter 18,
the load assignments for power exercises do not follow the typical %RM–
repetition relationship, but their relative intensities are elevated during this phase
(table 22.3). Specifically, the exercises selected in this phase can dictate the
loading that is used (55). For example, the development of power may be
1597
