(as calculated using equation 2.3) by the number of repetitions to
calculate the amount of work performed during the set. We can do
this over all sets of this exercise or all sets of all exercises for which
we are able to calculate work with a degree of accuracy, and we can
use this to provide an estimate of workload.
Power is the rate that work is performed with respect to time, so
to calculate power, we need a way to record the time element. In
the previous barbell press example, this is the duration of the
concentric (upward) phase over which the work was performed—in
that case, 0.815 seconds. The power achieved by pressing a 60-
kilogram barbell 0.541 meters overhead in 0.815 seconds is 390.71
watts. And again, we can manipulate this by either performing more
work in the same time or by performing the same work in less time
(to increase power).
Over the years, developments in technology have enabled
simultaneous recording of force and movement characteristics such
as displacement and velocity. This has enabled researchers and
practitioners to more easily calculate biomechanically derived
performance metrics such as work and power, and while time-
efficient performance tracking processes are critical, it can mean that
important theoretical underpinnings are lost. Where it is possible to
simultaneously record the force causing the velocity of a movement,
power can be calculated by simply multiplying these two values. In
doing this, the calculation of work and the time taken to perform it
can be skipped entirely. This is a missed opportunity to gain the
fullest understanding of the athlete’s capacity at that point in time
because this is information that could help inform what the athlete
needs to do to improve their power capacity.
The ability to simultaneously record force and movement
characteristics such as displacement and velocity has also led to the
measurement, calculation, and use of peak power, which is
frequently referred to as the highest instantaneous power. While this
can result in some impressive numbers, the fact that it refers to the
rate of work performed over one data sampling window is frequently
133
