Wild and colleagues (107) examined the first three steps during initial
acceleration and observed that sprinters achieved greater step velocities and
greater normalized average horizontal external power, and they displayed greater
normalized step length and flight length, greater normalized touchdown distance
(i.e., foot impact under or behind COM), and greater toe-off distance (i.e., effective
push-off behind COM) compared to rugby forwards and backs. Conversely, rugby
backs displayed slightly shorter contact times and slightly greater step rates
compared to sprinters. From a kinetics perspective for later acceleration at
matched velocities (step 8-12 for sprinters and 9-20 for soccer), while no
differences were observed in the initial 20% of the stance phase between sprinters
and soccer athletes, sprinters produced greater anterior–posterior force across
most of the propulsive phase and greater net forces over similar contact times,
thus resulting in greater relative net impulse (25). As such, the sprinters achieved
greater average horizontal external power, which allowed them to accelerate
beyond the velocity plateau of the soccer athletes.
It should be noted that the spatiotemporal, kinematic, and kinetic differences
observed could be partially attributed to sprinters accelerating from a four-point
position using blocks and performed on a rubber surface while wearing spikes. This
results in different body segment orientations such as greater forward trunk lean
and horizontal shin angles, which contribute to more horizontally orientated force
(107). Conversely, team-sport athletes initiate their sprints from a more upright,
two-point staggered-stance position (resulting in a more vertically orientated
force), on a different surface with less favorable frictional properties for achieving
peak speed (i.e., grass, field turf, indoor courts), and with different footwear that is
designed for multidirectional and sport-specific movements (e.g., cleats or
trainers). Additionally, sprinters’ preparation strategies are designed around the
sole task of maximizing linear speed, which is the aim of that sport, and an
isolated event. As such, sprinting is a skill, and thus, sprinters can dedicate more
time and deliberate practice to developing the skill of sprinting, while their
periodized strength and conditioning programs can also be tailored to maximize
the physical qualities that underpin linear sprinting. Conversely, team-sport
athletes must be proficient at a range of multidirectional movements (i.e.,
changing direction, curved sprints of varying radii and direction, compared to
sprinters who perform curved sprints anticlockwise with radii ≥40 yd [36.5 m], and
deceleration) and sport-specific skills (e.g., passing, tackling, shooting).
Additionally, team-sport athletes must perform technical and tactical training and
generally must do so repeatedly over the course of long matches (generally
ranging 40-90 mins) and competitive seasons. Due to these competing demands,
team-sport athletes must spend a significantly lower proportion of time developing
sprinting skills, while their preparation programs also differ due to the different
physical, biomechanical, and cardiorespiratory fitness demands between sports.
1470
