recommendation (3). Saturated fat is fat that is often found solid at
room temperature. Examples of these include milk fat, butter, or the
fat inside or around meat. Ideally, saturated fat should be limited in
the diet and the focus should be on unsaturated fats such as liquid
oils used in cooking. In a general, nonactive population, sodium
should also be minimized in the diet to no more than 2,300
milligrams per day, but health recommendations for lower salt intake
may not be appropriate for endurance athletes and those who sweat
a lot. Alcohol has calories but few nutrients; adults of legal drinking
age who choose to drink should do so in moderation.
MyPlate should be considered a starting point that athletes can
use to evaluate their diet. In general, if a diet provides a variety of
foods from each group, it is more likely to contain an adequate
amount of each macronutrient, vitamin, and mineral. However, if the
diet excludes an entire food group, specific nutrients may be lacking.
For example, an athlete who excludes dairy from the diet may have
a tough time meeting his or her nutrition requirements for calcium
and vitamin D (in fortified milk and fortified yogurts). Fortified soy
alternatives are viewed by the USDA as the only plant-based milk
alternative equivalent to milk, whereas other nondairy milk
alternatives do not have the same nutritional value as milk and must
be chosen carefully to avoid deficiencies in calcium and vitamin D
(45). Added sugars are also a concern in plant-based milk
alternatives. Individuals who exclude all animal foods and fish might
not meet their vitamin B12 needs. B12 is found in meat, poultry, fish,
eggs, and dairy foods, though some breakfast cereals, nondairy milk
alternatives, meat substitutes, and nutritional yeast are fortified with
B12. Thus, it is highly recommended that individuals who exclude
food groups work with their sports dietitian to find suitable
replacements or replacement combinations to ensure that they meet
their nutrient requirements for health and performance.
Foods within each food group share similar nutrient compositions
and are considered interchangeable; however, a variety of foods
should be consumed within each group. For example, eating an
544
