Director of Strength and Conditioning
(Head Strength and Conditioning
Professional)
The director of strength and conditioning (referred to hereafter as
director)—also commonly referred to as the head strength and
conditioning 
professional—is 
both 
a 
practitioner 
and 
an
administrator. This person is responsible for the overall strength and
conditioning 
program, 
facility, 
equipment, 
staff, 
and 
such
administrative tasks as preparing a budget, purchasing equipment,
preparing proposals, and working with administration and media.
Figure 26.1 shows a sample job listing for such a position. A job
announcement similar to these can be used to attract quality
applicants. Figure 26.2 provides a sample general job description
that outlines responsibilities for a director of strength and
conditioning.
Figure 26.1  Sample director of strength and
conditioning job listing.
Responsibilities and duties as assigned by the director of athletics include
developing and monitoring performance training programs for athletic teams,
implementing safe and effective program design based on scientific principles,
instructing proper resistance training exercise techniques, speed and agility
development, and testing and evaluation. The head strength and conditioning
professional will oversee policies and procedures, facility organization, record
management, and risk management for the strength and conditioning
performance team in collaboration with the institution. The strength and
conditioning professional should work cooperatively with the medical, sports
psychology, and nutrition staff in the interest of student-athlete development,
health, and well-being. A bachelor’s degree is required, with a master’s degree
preferred (with emphasis in the exercise sciences). The strength and conditioning
professional must possess certification from an independent accreditation agency
(e.g., Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist by the National Strength and
Conditioning Association) and maintain continuing education requirements. First
aid, 
cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation, 
and 
automated 
external 
defibrillator
certifications required. Two years’ experience is required in progressively
responsible positions involving development and management of sport-specific
individual and group performance training programs. Excellent management,
1783
