Nonetheless, this limited amount of oxygen transported in plasma
contributes to the partial pressure of oxygen in blood and other body
fluids, thus playing a role in the mechanisms that regulate breathing
and in the diffusion of oxygen into alveolar blood and the cells of
body tissues (17, 27).
Given the limited capacity of plasma to carry oxygen, the majority
of oxygen in blood is carried by the hemoglobin. Men have about 15
to 16 g of hemoglobin per 100 mL of blood, and women have about
14 g of hemoglobin per 100 mL of blood. One gram of hemoglobin
can carry 1.34 mL of oxygen; thus, the oxygen-carrying capacity of
100 mL of blood is about 20 mL of oxygen in men and a little less in
women (27).
The way in which carbon dioxide is removed from the system has
some similarities to oxygen transport, but the vast amount of carbon
dioxide is removed by a more complex process. After carbon dioxide
is formed in the cell, it easily diffuses across the cell membranes and
is subsequently transported to the lungs. As with oxygen, only a
limited quantity of carbon dioxide—about 5% of that produced
during metabolism—is carried in the plasma; similar to the situation
with oxygen, this limited amount of carbon dioxide contributes to
establishing the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood.
Some carbon dioxide is also transported via hemoglobin, but this
amount is limited (27).
The greatest amount of carbon dioxide removal (approximately
70%) is from the combination with water and delivery to the lungs in
the form of bicarbonate (HCO3−). The initial step in this reversible
reaction is the combination of carbon dioxide in solution with water
in the red blood cells to form carbonic acid. The reaction would
normally be quite slow except for the impact of the enzyme carbonic
anhydrase, which significantly speeds up this process. Once carbonic
acid is formed, it is broken down to hydrogen ions and bicarbonate
ions. Because hemoglobin is a significant acid–base buffer, hydrogen
ions combine with hemoglobin. This process helps to maintain the
pH of the blood. Bicarbonate ions diffuse from the red blood cells to
93
