Central Concepts Related to Periodization
A successful training program allows for management of the adaptive and
recovery responses to specific interventions that are delivered in a structured
way (41). The ultimate success of any training program centers on its ability to
induce specific physiological adaptations and translate those adaptations into
increases in performance. At the center of this process is the ability to manage
the adaptive response, handle accumulated fatigue, and capitalize on the
aftereffects established from the various training factors encountered. The
strength of a periodized training plan lies in its ability to sequence and structure
the training interventions in order to manage all of these factors and peak
performance at appropriate time points (35, 37, 38, 41). Ultimately, peak
performance can be optimized only for short periods of time (7-14 days), and the
average time it can be maintained is inversely related to the average intensity of
the training plan (35, 36). In order to elucidate how periodized training models
can manage these factors, three basic mechanistic theories have been
established: the general adaptation syndrome (GAS), stimulus–fatigue–
recovery–adaptation theory, and the fitness–fatigue paradigm (35, 38,
41).
Periodization is the logical and systematic process of sequencing
and integrating training interventions in order to manage the
training process and to increase the potential of achieving peak
performance at appropriate time points.
The General Adaptation Syndrome
In the 1930s, Hans Selye, a pioneering researcher on the biological effects of
exposure to stressful stimuli, presented the basic concepts of the GAS in which a
three-stage response to stress (alarm, resistance, and exhaustion) was presented
(82). His later work expanded on these early findings by taking into consideration
both physical (9, 84, 85) and psychoemotional stress (20, 83, 86). While not
originally conceptualized in the context of physical training, over time the GAS has
become one of the foundational concepts used to explain periodization theories
(20, 29, 35). Any time the body experiences a novel, new, or more intense stress
than previously applied (e.g., lifting a heavier training load or a greater volume-
load; see chapter 18), the initial response, or alarm phase, is marked by an
accumulation of fatigue, soreness, stiffness, or reduction in energetic stores that
results in a reduction in performance capacity (20, 92). Depending on the
magnitude of the stress encountered by the athlete, this response may last
several hours, days, or weeks. After this initial response, the body moves into the
1582
