Therefore, changes in the firing rate (or discharge rate) of the motor
unit also affect muscle force generation. With increased motor unit
firing rates, the muscle fibers are continually activated by
subsequent action potentials before the fibers have time to
completely relax following a prior action potential. Therefore,
increasing motor unit firing rates enhances the summation of
successive muscle twitches, which is expressed as augmented
contractile strength (1). Increases in motor unit firing rates
represent a potential adaptive mechanism that correlates with
improvements in strength in response to resistance training (166).
Gains in maximal strength and power of agonist muscles are
generally associated with an increase in recruitment; an increased
rate of firing; greater motor unit synchronization of neural discharge
intra-muscularly, and improved inter-muscle coordination, which is
the learned motor behavior coordinating the activity of multiple
muscles in synergy during movement (40a, 148); or a combination
of all these factors.
The recruitment or decruitment of motor units in an orderly
manner is governed by Henneman’s size principle (figure 5.2),
which represents the relationship between motor unit twitch force
and recruitment threshold (140). According to this principle, motor
units are recruited in an ascending order according to their soma
size. Thus, motor units with small motor neurons have lower
recruitment thresholds than do motor units with large motor
neurons. High-threshold motor units are generally quick to fatigue
but have greater force-producing ability. The recruitment threshold
of a motor unit also determines its firing rate characteristics, and
thus there is an inverse association between motor unit recruitment
threshold and a motor unit’s typical firing rate. This arrangement
provides several advantages, including the ability to precisely
gradate force production—particularly at low levels of force
production—as well as enhanced fatigue resistance (29a, 38a).
290
