Iron
Iron is essential for both the functioning and synthesis of
hemoglobin, a protein that transfers oxygen throughout the body
(158). In addition, iron is a component of the protein myoglobin,
which transports oxygen to muscles (63). This mineral plays
important roles in growth, development, cell functioning, and the
synthesis and functioning of some hormones (30, 160).
Iron deficiency and iron deficiency anemia is a major public health
concern worldwide, mainly affecting women and children (40).
Though it disproportionately affects those in developing countries, it
is common in industrialized countries as well. The National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) from 2015-16 found
that approximately 11% of American females aged 12 to 49 had iron
deficiency, with the goal to reduce that level to 7.2% (99). (In
studies examining iron deficiency in female athletes, more than 25%
tested positive for iron deficiency [65, 102].) Iron deficiency occurs
in three stages (in order of severity): depletion, marginal deficiency,
and anemia (90, 117). Iron carries oxygen to the working muscles,
and even marginal iron deficiency may impair athletic performance
(19, 63). Iron deficiency anemia develops when low iron stores
persist for a period of time and the body cannot make enough
healthy red blood cells to deliver oxygen throughout the body (158).
Symptoms depend on the individual; some people are asymptomatic
or get used to their symptoms and assume that they are normal.
Symptoms of iron deficiency or iron deficiency anemia may include
weakness, fatigue, irritability, poor concentration, headache,
decreased exercise capacity, hair loss, and dry mouth (15). Other
symptoms associated with iron deficiency anemia include feeling cold
often, inflamed tongue (glossitis), shortness of breath during routine
activities, and pica (the desire to eat nonfood substances such as
laundry starch, dirt, clay, and ice) (52). Iron deficiency has also been
shown to negatively affect mental health and contribute to
depression (30, 99).
586
