intensity that is too low does not stress the body’s systems and
induce the desired physiological adaptations, whereas an intensity
that is too high results in excessive fatigue and a premature end to
the training session. In either instance, the training session will be
poor and ineffective.
The most accurate methods for regulating exercise intensity are
to monitor oxygen consumption during exercise to determine its
percentage of V̇ O2max and to periodically measure blood lactate
concentration to determine the relationship to LT. If V̇ O2max
monitoring is not available, exercise prescriptions can use heart rate,
ratings of perceived exertion, metabolic equivalents (in clinical
populations), or exercise velocity to monitor exercise intensity.
Power-measuring devices are also frequently used by elite and top-
level amateur competitors, especially in cycling.
Heart Rate
Heart rate is likely the most frequently used method for prescribing
aerobic exercise intensity. The reason is the close relationship
between heart rate and oxygen consumption, especially when the
intensity is between 50% and 90% of functional capacity
(V̇ O2max), also called heart rate reserve (HRR). HRR is the
difference between an athlete’s maximal heart rate and their resting
heart rate (24). The most common means of regulating intensity
using this method is to determine the specific heart rate associated
with the desired percentage of V̇ O2max or the heart rate associated
with the LT. For the greatest precision, this necessitates laboratory
testing to identify these exercise intensities. If laboratory testing is
unavailable, the individual’s age-predicted maximal heart rate
(APMHR) is often used as the basis for determining exercise
intensity. While there are numerous APMHR equations, all of which
are estimates and have been shown to have varying degrees of bias,
the Fox equation (APMHR = 220 - age) appears less prone to under-
and overestimation of HRmax in the general population (123). It is
important to note, however, that the Fox equation is also susceptible
1525
