their diet, by consuming fewer foods that have untoward effects on
overall health or performance, they may consider macronutrient
ranking systems such as the glycemic index or glycemic load.
Glycemic Index and Glycemic Load
The glycemic index (GI) ranks carbohydrates according to how
quickly they are digested and absorbed, and therefore raise blood
glucose levels, in the 2-hour time period after a meal, compared to
the same amount (by weight in grams) of a reference food, typically
white bread or glucose, which is given a GI of 100 (78).
Glycemic index = Incremental area under the curve for the blood glucose
response after consumption of a 25 or 50g carbohydrate portion of a test food
÷ Incremental area under the curve for the blood glucose response after
consumption of the same portion (in grams) of a standard food × 100      
(10.1)
Low-GI foods are digested and absorbed slowly, resulting in a
smaller rise in blood glucose and subsequent insulin release from the
pancreas compared to the reference food (7, 78). Insulin helps lower
blood glucose levels by facilitating glucose transport into cells. The
fate of glucose within cells depends on where it is shuttled. For
instance, muscle cells use glucose for energy while fat cells convert
glucose into triglycerides (fat).
Though the GI was developed to help people better control their
blood sugar levels—something that is particularly helpful for those
with diabetes—research in large cohorts of participants has
suggested that diets with high versus low GI foods are associated
with increased incidence of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
diabetes-related cancers, and all-cause mortality (49, 79). However,
the GI system has a few issues that may limit its accuracy. First,
published GI values for a given type of food may vary considerably
due to differences in testing and variations in ingredients used;
ripeness of food; and method of food processing, cooking, and
storage (28, 62). Secondly, consuming carbohydrate as part of a
meal or in different quantities affects the GI (7, 8). Low-GI foods
561
