Flooring
Several types of flooring options are available for a strength and
conditioning facility. The most common option is some type of
rubber flooring and an antimicrobial carpet. Another option is indoor
turf, which can be useful if the strength and conditioning
professional plans to have athletes perform dynamic warm-up,
plyometric, agility, or conditioning exercises. Turf is also a good
surface for ground-based movements and sled pushes that require a
more field-like surface than typical gym flooring. Rubber flooring is
available in rolls, tile inserts, and mats and is considered a premier
option because it protects the subfloor from heavy weights and
provides durable cushioning. Rubber flooring can also be easier to
clean than carpet and is generally more durable and long-lasting
within a facility. As a general rule for safety, floor surfaces in physical
activity areas should be slip-resistant to minimize the risk of exercise
and fall-related injuries (2).
For facilities designed to train athletes for weightlifting
competitions, platforms should have a middle portion made of wood
and outer sections made of rubber, in alignment with competition
rules. Especially in high-traffic strength and conditioning facilities,
inlaid platforms are a safer alternative to raised platforms because
they are flush with the floor and do not present a tripping hazard.
Lighting
Strength and conditioning facilities have special lighting needs to
keep athletes safe and focused on training. Key lighting
considerations should include energy efficiency and the use of
natural lighting when possible (11). To determine proper lighting,
one must consider the square footage of the facility, ceiling height,
and the amount of natural sunlight entering the facility through
windows. Lighting is recommended between 20 to 30 foot candles
(fc; 1 fc = lumen/ft2) or 200 to 300 lux (lx; 1 lx = lumen/m2) at floor
level for general gym areas and up to 50 foot candles or 500 lux for
dedicated resistance training and group exercise areas (2, 11, 18).
1744
