Although such goals demand less biophysical knowledge, they may
be profoundly useful in increasing performance because they are
goals that an athlete has tremendous control over and can facilitate
inhibiting 
habitual 
negative 
self-talk. 
However, 
the 
most
comprehensive goal-setting programs encompass several areas of
exercise science in that they might involve goals from any number of
subdisciplines, including physiological, metabolic, biomechanical,
nutrition, and psychological. This requirement uniquely distinguishes
sport psychology from other behavioral sciences.
In general, guidelines for goal setting include the following:
Long-term goals and short-term goals are interdependent.
Long-term goals provide a sense of meaningfulness and
direction for pursuing short-term goals.
The attainment of short-term goals provides a hierarchical
sense of mastery and success that builds self-confidence.
Athletes should define process goals to focus on elements of
their performance over which they have control.
Yips, Choking, Flow, and Clutch
Often coaches struggle with helping athletes with being less anxious when they
compete. Anxiety can interfere with fluid movement patterns. This is known as the
yips, the twisties, or, during critical moments, choking. The more technical term is
focal dystonia.
Simone Biles describes her twisties as a moment when she started thinking and
lost air awareness and proprioception as she rotated during a gymnastics
competition (58a). “If I still had my air awareness, and I just was having a bad
day, I would have continued.… But it was more than that.… It’s so dangerous.…
It’s a miracle I landed on my feet.… As soon as I landed that vault, I went and told
my coach that I cannot continue.” She expressed a deficit mental focus that
created spatial disorientation. Rick Ankiel describes this during his Major League
Baseball pitching career like this: “I was pitching with fear … That put me into a
freeze mindset, and that’s what led to the yips.” Closely related but distinct,
choking is when focal dystonia happens during a critical time during performance
execution.
Researchers have suggested that perfectionism, social comparison, and dystonia
are associated with choking. Opposed to this experience is the positive emotional
state of flow. Athletes describe flow as effortless movement, complete trust in
503
