Musculotendinous trauma is classified as either a contusion (if
the trauma was direct) or a strain (if the trauma was indirect). A
muscle contusion is an area of excess accumulation of blood and
fluid in the tissues surrounding the injured muscle; it may severely
limit the function of the injured muscle. Muscle strains are tears of
muscle fibers and are further assigned grades, or degrees. A first-
degree strain is a partial tear of individual fibers and is characterized
by strong but painful muscle activity. A second-degree strain is a
partial tear with weak, painful muscle activity. A third-degree muscle
strain is a complete tear of the fibers and is manifested by very
weak, painless muscle activity. A tendon, like a muscle, can also
rupture if the tensile load applied to it exceeds its limit. Typically,
tendon collagen fibers are significantly stronger than the muscle
fibers to which they attach, so failure is more likely to occur within
the muscle belly, at the musculotendinous junction, or at the tendon
attachment to the bone than within the substance of the tendon.
Microtrauma, or overuse injury, results from repeated, abnormal
stress applied to a tissue by continuous training or training with too
little recovery time. Overuse injuries may be due to training errors
(e.g., poor program design and excessive volume), suboptimal
training surfaces (e.g., too hard or uneven), faulty biomechanics or
technique during performance, insufficient motor control, decreased
flexibility, or skeletal malalignment and predisposition (86, 97). Two
common overuse injuries involve bone and tendon. The most
common overuse injury to bone is a stress fracture. Although body
type and structure, nutrition, and metabolic factors play a large role,
stress fractures are often the result of a rapid increase in training
volume or excessive training volume on hard training surfaces (4,
97). Tendinitis is inflammation of a tendon (83), and if the cause of
the inflammation is left uncorrected, chronic tendinitis or
tendinopathy may develop. (A term with the suffix -itis refers to an
inflammatory 
condition 
[e.g., 
tendinitis 
and 
arthritis].)
Tendinopathy is a degenerative condition characterized by minimal
1638
