gymnastics training (160). The study adopted a linear periodized
approach to training with a large proportion of time devoted to
general preparatory training. The gains in athleticism reported
exceeded those of both of a gymnastics-only and a non-gymnastics
control group. Interestingly, this study demonstrated a temporal
response to training, like the findings of Pichardo and colleagues
(187). Significant improvements were observed in different physical
attributes over time. After four months, isometric absolute peak
force and standing broad jump showed notable increases. By seven
months, improvements were seen in countermovement jump height,
modified reactive strength index, and drop jump height. Finally, at
the 10-month mark, enhancements were noted in peak sprint speed,
spring-like behavior, and vaulting vertical takeoff velocity. This study
underscores the benefits of long-term engagement in strength and
conditioning and that some adaptations take time to materialize,
especially in less mature children.
Changes in muscle hypertrophy can significantly contribute to
training-induced strength gains in adolescents and adults, yet it is
unlikely that muscle hypertrophy is primarily responsible for training-
induced strength gains (at least up to 20 weeks) in preadolescents
(179, 197). Although some findings do not agree with this
suggestion, preadolescents appear to experience more difficulty
increasing their muscle mass through a resistance training program
due to inadequate levels of circulating hormones (testosterone,
growth hormone, insulin-like growth factor). In preadolescent boys
and girls, testosterone concentration is between 20 and 60 ng/100
mL; in contrast, during adolescence, testosterone levels in males
increase to about 600 ng/100 mL while the levels in females remain
unchanged (146).
It appears that preadolescents have more potential for an
increase in strength owing to neural factors, such as increases in
motor unit activation and synchronization as well as enhanced motor
unit recruitment and firing frequency (90, 105, 139, 179, 197). It
has also been suggested that intrinsic muscle adaptations,
404
