facilitated with a load of 80% of the 1RM with power cleans performed from the
hang (55) or floor (17), while a load of 50% to 70% of the 1RM may be used
with the bench press throw when the aim is to maximize power development
(55). Ultimately, to address both strength and power development, a mixed
training approach is warranted in which heavy- and low-load training is used to
optimize both attributes (44).
The strength/power phase involves low to very high loads
(30%-95% of the 1RM, depending on the exercise) and low
volumes (2 to 5 sets for 2 to 5 repetitions).
Competitive Period
The central training target during the competitive period is preparing the
athlete for competition by further increasing strength and power via additional
increases in training intensity while decreasing volume. This process can be a
delicate balancing act, because adequate volume and intensity of training are
needed to maintain competitive preparedness, and reductions in volume,
intensity, or both are needed to optimize performance. To understand this
conundrum, consider the fitness–fatigue paradigm presented earlier. If training
workloads (volume or intensity) are reduced too much, fatigue will be reduced,
but there will be a concomitant decrease in overall fitness that results in a
reduction in competitive preparedness. Also during this period, time spent
practicing sport-specific skills and tactics increases dramatically, and a
proportional decrease occurs in time spent performing physical conditioning
activities such as resistance training. For example, a sprinter places even more
emphasis on speed, reaction time, sprint-specific plyometric drills, and technique
training. The competitive period may last for one or two weeks for some sports in
which a peaking program is employed (6, 36, 69). Peaking programs attempt to
place the athlete in peak condition for about one or two weeks. Trying to extend
this to longer durations ultimately results in reduced performance capacity as a
result of reduction in fitness or potential overtraining (36, 38). Depending on the
load-reduction strategy employed, peaking programs result in a progressive shift
from higher-intensity training toward lower-intensity work designed to reduce
fatigue as the athlete moves through the taper before competition (36). As shown
in table 22.3 (page 730), resistance training may range between 50% and ≥93%
of the 1RM, depending on where athletes are in the peaking program.
For team sports, this period spans an entire season and may last for many
months, requiring the use of a maintenance program (5). Because of the
prolonged duration of the competitive period in this situation, the intensity and
volume of training must be manipulated on a microcycle basis to maintain
1598
