4. The last speed maintained for at least 2 minutes is considered the speed associated with
V̇ O2max or MAS.
5. The test is terminated if the athlete fails to reach the next cone on two consecutive occasions
in the required time.
6. The speed at the last completed stage is increased by 0.5 km/h if the athlete is able to run a
half stage.
7. The V̇ O2max of the athlete can be calculated by multiplying 3.5 × MAS (speed in km/h) (87,
88).
8. If the tester does not have access to the audio version, it is possible to conduct the test using
a whistle. Calculate the timing of whistles using a set speed for reaching the next cone. For
example, when the distance between cones is 25 meters, the timing of whistles for 10 km/h
would be every 9 seconds.
Note: Norms for the V̇ O2max of athletes in various sports are shown in table 14.26 near the end of
the chapter.
  24   30-15 INTERMITTENT FITNESS TEST (IFT)
Equipment
A 40-meter (44 yd) long surface that is stable and suitable for an athlete to run on
Measuring tape
Marking cones
30-15 IFT audio recording and a player suitable for the media type being used that can be
heard across the testing environment
Personnel
One recorder/tester
Procedure
1. Measure out and arrange the cones as shown in figure 14.20 (at lines A, B, and C).
2. Have the athletes warm up before the test by running the course with a submaximal effort for
practice.
3. The test begins with the athletes standing at the start line (line A).
4. The first interval begins at a jogging speed of 8.0 km/h (5 mph). The speed is then increased
by 0.5 km/h (0.3 mph) in each subsequent stage.
5. Athletes run using the beeps played from the audio file to maintain their pace. They run
between lines A and C, and they should pass through each 3-meter (10 ft) zone associated
with lines A, B, and C with the sound of each beep.
6. A different type of beep indicates when to stop running. At that point the athletes have 15
seconds as a recovery to walk to the next line, where they will wait for the start of the next
interval.
7. Athletes advance stages until they cannot reach the relevant line on three consecutive beeps.
8. Record the running speed (km/h) achieved during the last completed stage (VIFT). The total
running distance of each interval is corrected by a factor of 0.7 second per change of direction.
Note: Descriptive data for the 30-15 IFT are presented in figure 14.34 (a, females; b, males) near
the end of the chapter.
803
