  11   REBOUND JUMP
Equipment
Floor with good traction
Measurement equipment such as force plates (with corresponding software on a laptop or
tablet), jump mats, optoelectronic systems, and smartphone applications
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. Rebound-based vertical jumps require the athlete to jump from a preceding vertical jump.
When performing a rebound vertical jump, the athlete should first complete a maximal-effort
vertical countermovement jump followed by either a predetermined number of rebound
vertical jump repetitions or a predetermined set duration (e.g., 10 seconds). Rebound vertical
jumps from a ground-start position have been performed with single or multiple repetitions,
including the 10-5 repeated jump test (64), which requires 10 maximal vertical rebound jumps
following the initial maximum countermovement jump.
2. All styles of rebound vertical jump should be performed with the athlete attempting to jump
with a short ground contact time while still aiming to jump as high as possible. A short ground
contact time is achieved by limiting flexion of the ankles, knees, and hips while in contact with
the ground by adopting high leg stiffness (high force with shallow range of motion).
3. As per the drop jump, the most reported performance variables following rebound vertical
jump testing are jump height, ground contact time, and reactive strength index (calculated as
jump height divided by ground contact time). For the 10-5 repeated jump test, the best 5
repetitions in terms of reactive strength index are used and averaged for the test outcome.
Note: Descriptive data for the rebound jump are presented in table 14.11 near the end of the
chapter.
   12  MARGARIA-KALAMEN TEST
Equipment
Staircase with nine or more steps, each approximately 7 inches (18 cm) high, and a straight
and flat lead-up area 20 feet (6 m) or more in length (figure 14.13)
Measuring tape or stick
An electronic timing system with both a start and a stop switch mechanism
Scale
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. The height of each step is measured with a ruler or tape measure, and the elevation from the
third step to the ninth step is calculated (6 × step height).
2. The timer start switch mechanism is placed on the third step, and the stop switch mechanism
is placed on the ninth step.
3. The athlete to be tested is weighed on a scale, warms up, and practices running up the stairs
three steps at a time.
4. When ready, the athlete sprints toward the stairs from a standing start 20 feet (6 m) from the
base of the stairs and then up the staircase three steps at a time (third step to sixth step to
792
