resistance phase, when it adapts to the stimulus and returns to a normal
functional capacity. If the training stress is appropriately structured and not
excessive, these adaptive responses can result in specific biochemical, structural,
and mechanical adjustments that further elevate the athlete’s performance
capacity, resulting in what is termed supercompensation (91).
An additional factor that modulates the stress response to training is the
athlete’s psychological and emotional state (95, 96). If the athlete has chronic
elevations in psychological and emotional stress, the magnitude of the fatigue
response will be increased during the alarm phase and the time course for
recovery will be lengthened, resulting in an elongation of the resistance phase,
ultimately resulting in a delayed supercompensation response (38). As such, the
strength and conditioning professional must not only monitor the training loads
the athlete is exposed to but must also consider the athlete’s current
psychological and emotional state when manipulating training loads within the
periodized training plan. In this regard, the integration of a comprehensive
monitoring program can provide additional information that allows that strength
and conditioning professional to better manage the athlete’s exposure to training
stress and increase the potential for appropriate elevations in performance.
If, however, the stress persists (either physical or psychoemotional) for an
extended period of time, the athlete can move into the exhaustion phase. If this
occurs, the athlete is demonstrating an inability to adapt to the imposed stressors
and will present some of the same symptoms noted in the alarm phase.
Ultimately, when athletes reach the exhaustion phase, they are most likely
experiencing overreaching or overtraining responses (see chapter 24 for
additional information) (20). From a training perspective, excessive loading,
monotonous training, and overly varied training can all result in the occurrence of
the exhaustion phase. Additionally, the responses to training can be affected by
other nontraining-related stress (e.g., occupational issues, insufficient sleep,
relationship, poor diet) that can contribute to the overall stress level experienced
by the athlete. Ultimately, the strength and conditioning professional should strive
to avoid the occurrence of this phase of the GAS through the proper planning,
management (periodization), and monitoring of training stressors. Although the
actual dimensions (i.e., slope, magnitude, and timing) of the curve shown in
figure 22.2 are highly individualized, this figure represents the basic application of
the GAS to training responses.
Stimulus–Fatigue–Recovery–Adaptation Theory
The stimulus–fatigue–recovery–adaptation theory is an extension of the GAS and
suggests that training stimuli produce a general response (figure 22.3) that is
influenced by the overall magnitude of the training stressor (38, 92). Specifically,
the greater the overall magnitude of the workload encountered, the more fatigue
1583
