total, which was 0.9 kilometers (0.6 miles) longer (a significant difference) than
the distance run while on the lower-carbohydrate diet. However, three of the
athletes ran less than 420 meters (459 yd) longer, indicating significant variability
in the athletes’ responses to a higher-carbohydrate regimen (14). The results of
this study may or may not be applicable to soccer players, since the average
distance covered in a soccer match is considerably shorter (10.3 km [6.4 miles]
with a range of 9.7 to 11.3 km [6.0-7.0 miles], as reported in one study), and it
is covered in an intermittent manner and at varying levels of intensity (72).
In a study examining the effect of carbohydrate loading on resistance exercise
performance, eight healthy young men were randomly assigned to either a
higher-carbohydrate (6.5 g of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight) or a
moderate-carbohydrate diet (4.4 g of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight) for
four days. After this period, they participated in a resistance exercise test
including 4 sets of 12 repetitions of maximal-effort jump squats with a load of
30% of a 1-repetition maximum (1RM) and a 2-minute rest period between sets
(52). There was no significant difference in power performance between subjects
on the high-carbohydrate and the moderate-carbohydrate diets. Therefore, in
this study a higher-carbohydrate diet did not enhance power performance during
a 4-set resistance exercise test. However, it is unclear whether the carbohydrate
loading regimen could have affected power performance if more sets were
performed or if the carbohydrate loading regimen more closely resembled that of
an aerobic endurance athlete, providing 8 to 10 grams carbohydrate per kilogram
body weight (52).
The degree of benefit derived from carbohydrate loading varies between
individuals, even between aerobic endurance athletes, and therefore athletes
should determine the value of this regimen while weighing any negative side
effects, such as temporary weight gain, in practice before competition. Athletes
who use carbohydrate loading as a means to maximize glycogen storage should
also know how different types of carbohydrates affect them. For instance,
oligosaccharides, which are found in dry beans and peas, onions, and foods with
added inulin or other oligosaccharides (such as some nutrition bars and shakes),
are rapidly fermented by bacteria in the gut, which can lead to excessive
intestinal gas and bloating. Dietary fiber is found in vegetables, fruits, whole
grains, dry beans and peas, nuts, and seeds (140). Table 11.2 provides a sample
daily meal plan for a 68-kilogram (150-pound) athlete following research-based
carbohydrate recommendations for aerobic endurance athletes.
Carbohydrate loading is an effective strategy to maximize glycogen
storage. However, athletes must consume 8 to 10 grams of
623
