pulldown, biceps curl, triceps extension) exercises performed first thing in the
morning after an overnight fast. After exercise each day and at breakfast on
nontraining days they consumed a nutrition drink containing 30 grams of milk
protein, 25.9 grams of carbohydrate, and 3.4 grams of fat. The study authors
found no relationship between the acute rise (6 hours posttraining) in muscle
protein synthesis due to exercise training and the nutrition drink provided and
muscle hypertrophy. However, the authors also noted that changes in muscle
protein synthesis with training were not uniform between study subjects;
therefore, though acute changes in muscle protein synthesis are important for
muscle hypertrophy, they are not the sole factor that predicts a person’s
potential to increase muscle growth (86). Thirty grams of milk protein, as used in
this study, provides an estimated 24 grams of casein, 6 grams of whey protein,
and a total of 2.8 grams of leucine (139).
Concurrent Training
Exercise interference is a concept suggesting that aerobic endurance exercise,
when combined with resistance training (back-to-back sessions), blunts gains in
strength compared to resistance training alone but results in improvements in
aerobic endurance performance (148). While interest in concurrent training-
based research has increased over time, nutrition recommendations for
concurrent training are often based on isolated studies examining the impact of
nutrition interventions on aerobic endurance or resistance training alone. The
consumption of carbohydrate after aerobic endurance exercise and before lifting
can help suppress skeletal muscle breakdown. Also, given the impact of protein
intake after aerobic endurance exercise on muscle protein synthesis, as well as
the research suggesting that protein intake during prolonged (>2 h) resistance
training supports greater rates of muscle protein synthesis during exercise
compared to a carbohydrate control, athletes should consider consuming protein
after aerobic endurance exercise, before lifting, or during their lifting session if
performing aerobic endurance exercise first (107).
Daily Protein Intake
While ingestion of protein around training is beneficial for athletes to aid in
recovery and adaptation, this may have relatively little benefit if daily intake is
sufficient. For this reason, protein consumption with each meal represents an
ideal strategy to meet these needs and maintain a positive physiological
environment for athletes. Resistance training has the ability to increase muscle
sensitivity to amino acids for 24 to 48 hours after exercise whereas the anabolic
effect of a meal lasts approximately 3 to 5 hours. For optimal muscle remodeling,
experts suggest consuming at least 20 to 40 grams of protein per meal and
636
