         1,3-bisphosphoglycerate + ADP + P i→Phosphoglycerate kinase  3-
phosphoglycerate + ATP  (3.6)
Phosphoenolpyruvate + ADP++ Pi→Pyruvate kinasePyruvate + ATP  (3.7)
The gross number of ATP molecules that are resynthesized as a
result of substrate-level phosphorylation during glycolysis is four
(figure 3.2, page 57). However, the reaction that converts fructose-
6-phosphate to fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (catalyzed by the enzyme
phosphofructokinase [PFK]) in glycolysis requires the hydrolysis
of one ATP molecule. In addition, there are two possible sources of
glucose: blood glucose and muscle glycogen. When blood glucose
enters the muscle cell, it must be phosphorylated to remain in the
cell and to maintain the glucose concentration gradient (67). The
phosphorylation of one molecule of blood glucose, which is catalyzed
by hexokinase, also requires the hydrolysis of one ATP. In contrast,
when muscle glycogen is broken down (i.e., glycogenolysis) to
glucose with the help of the enzyme glycogen phosphorylase, the
glucose is already phosphorylated, and it does not require the
hydrolysis of ATP. The bottom line is that when glycolysis begins with
one molecule of blood glucose, two ATP molecules are used and four
ATP are resynthesized, which results in a net resynthesis of two ATP
molecules. When glycolysis begins from muscle glycogen, only one
ATP is used and four ATP are resynthesized, which yields a net
resynthesis of three ATP molecules. The net yield rate of ATP
resynthesis highlights the role and importance of maintaining muscle
glycogen stores through proper nutrition.
Control of Glycolysis
In general, the rate of glycolysis is stimulated to increase during
intense muscle actions by high concentrations of ADP, Pi, and
ammonia and by a slight decrease in pH and AMP (22, 61, 142), all
of which are signs of increased ATP hydrolysis and a need for
energy. In contrast, glycolysis is inhibited by markedly lower pH,
ATP, CP, citrate, and increased free fatty acids (22), which are
usually present at rest. (Note that a slight decrease in pH increases
191
