FIGURE 14.33 Z-score column chart representing standardized test scores across different fitness tests for an individual athlete.
The zero represents the team average.
Percentile Rank An individual’s percentile rank is the percentage of test takers scoring below
that individual. As in calculation of the median, percentile ranking requires arranging scores
ordinally (lowest to highest). For example, if an athlete is ranked in the 75th percentile, 75% of the
group produced scores below that athlete’s score. Norms based on large samples are sometimes
expressed in evenly spaced percentiles. Several examples of percentile rank tables are shown in the
tables near the end of the chapter.
Inferential Versus Magnitude Statistics
The use of inferential statistics allows one to draw general conclusions about a population from
information collected in a population sample. For example, if a boys’ 9th-grade gym class is put
through a battery of tests and it is assumed that the class (sample) is representative of all the 9th-
grade boys in the school (the population), the results of these tests can be used to make inferences
about the population as a whole. A basic assumption of inferential statistics is that the sample is
truly representative of the population (27).
Magnitude statistics can provide a more useful approach for practitioners because it allows for
interpretation of the clinical significance of fitness testing (75). To describe and evaluate the
magnitude of change in a fitness test, measures such as smallest worthwhile change and effect size
are important.
Smallest worthwhile change refers to the ability of a test to detect the smallest practically
important change in performance. The ability to track changes with a fitness test depends on the
validity and reliability of that test. The smallest worthwhile change can be determined in a number
of ways, but it is typically calculated as 0.2 of the between-subjects standard deviation (75). For
example, if the standard deviation for a vertical jump test is 10 centimeters in a group of female
athletes, this would mean that the smallest worthwhile change for this group of athletes is 2
centimeters (0.2 × 10 cm).
824
