Sex-related differences in power output are similar to those for
muscular strength. Measurements comparing power outputs of
female athletes relative to lean body mass were reported to be
similar for lower body power and still presented differences for upper
body power when compared to male athletes (10, 61). Although the
data are equivocal, sex-related differences in the rate of force
development (147, 148) and the recruitment differences in muscle
activation where females express lower levels of type IIa fibers’
percent of myosin heavy chain isoform content (138, 139) could
partly explain these findings.
During progressive overload and targeted training, female athletes
experience substantial power and strength increases similar to male
athletes (64). In a recent study, maximal strength and vertical jump
height were increased in collegiate volleyball players by using a
combination of traditional resistance training exercises and
weightlifting variations at various loads in addition to volleyball
practice, over the course of about 2.5 years of training (88). Other
research supports plyometrics in female basketball players and other
velocity-based resistance training in cyclists to improve strength,
power, and muscle hypertrophy (36, 119). It has also been reported
that adding heavy strength training to a female athlete’s endurance
training increased muscle strength, performance, and size without
affecting endurance running performance or running economy (176).
Several studies have investigated menstrual cycle phase and
exercise performance, with some effects indicating that the phase of
cycle has an effect on performance in eumenorrheic females (111).
Additional research shows that in naturally cycling females, there are
minimal differences in strength measures between phases (19). The
practical relevance of phase-based training comes into question of
whether it is feasible to track female athletes’ cycles when
considering the variety of hormonal contraceptives they may be
using or menstrual cycle irregularities, especially in team-based
sports in which the number of athletes is high.
460
