both heavy resistance training and explosive or plyometric training
have been found to be effective training methods to concurrently
train with aerobic endurance training to improve running economy
(10, 31). Improvements in running economy and performance
following heavy resistance training and plyometric training are
primarily related to an increase in strength of the muscles used
during running thereby reducing the relative intensity of the load of
the exercising muscles (43). Plyometric training, which uses the
stretch-shortening cycle, not only improves the storage and elastic
energy properties of the exercising muscles but assists them to work
more efficiently (86). It is important to note that maximal strength
training has been found to produce greater benefits than
submaximal strength training or maximal power training, with
submaximal strength training producing the least gains of all other
methods (10).
It is also worth highlighting that no signs of overtraining (1) or
significant increases in body mass (1, 17), maximal oxygen uptake
(17), or blood lactate markers (17) have been associated with the
aerobic performance improvements for the majority of concurrent
training studies. However, not all concurrent training studies (143)
have resulted in improvements in aerobic endurance performance
measures. The differences between studies is often due to the
choice of resistance training exercises (e.g., high vs. low intensity,
explosive or plyometric) (80), characteristics of the participants, and
methods used to measure performance improvements (17). It is also
worth noting that studies that reported no improvement in running
economy often used a lower frequency of resistance training
sessions (17) and shorter duration concurrent training programs (31,
38).
Exercise Selection
Most studies found that athletes who have benefited from
concurrent training used free weight, multijoint exercises (17). This
benefit may be related to the higher level of muscle coordination and
1554
