arginine, glycine, and methionine are the precursors for the
synthesis of creatine in those organs. Creatine can also be obtained
through dietary sources. It is found in relative abundance in both
meat and fish. Approximately 98% of creatine is stored within
skeletal muscle in either its free form (40%) or its phosphorylated
form (60%). Smaller amounts of creatine are also stored in the
heart, brain, and testes. Creatine is transported from its site of
synthesis to the skeletal muscle via circulation.
Importance of Creatine to Exercise
Creatine, in the form of creatine phosphate (CP; also called
phosphocreatine [PCr]), has an essential role in energy metabolism
as a substrate for the formation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by
rephosphorylating adenosine diphosphate (ADP), especially during
short-duration, high-intensity exercise. The ability to rapidly
rephosphorylate ADP is dependent on the enzyme creatine kinase
and the availability of CP within the muscle. As CP stores become
depleted, the ability to perform high-intensity exercise declines. In
short-duration sprints (e.g., a 100 m sprint), the energy for fueling
the activity is derived primarily through the hydrolysis of CP.
However, as high-intensity exercise increases in duration, the ability
of CP to serve as an energy source is drastically reduced.
Depletion of muscle CP during high-intensity exercise is the
primary mechanism leading to fatigue in such events. During a 6-
second bout of maximal exercise, CP levels within the muscle are
reduced 35% to 57% from resting levels (81). As the duration of
high-intensity exercise increases to 30 seconds, CP levels in the
muscle are further reduced by approximately 64% to 80% from
resting levels (28, 40); during bouts of repeated high-intensity
exercise, CP levels in the muscle are almost completely depleted
(147). As muscle CP concentrations decrease, the ability to perform
maximal exercise is reduced. Hirvonen and colleagues (110)
demonstrated that sprint times were slower as CP concentrations
were reduced. It stands to reason that if muscle CP concentrations
713
