Anaerobic or Maximum Muscular Power (High-Speed
Strength)
High-speed muscular strength or maximal anaerobic muscular power (or anaerobic
power) is related to the ability of muscle tissue to exert high force while contracting at a high
speed. Tests of strength and power are of very short duration, are performed at maximal
movement speeds, and produce very high-power outputs. High-speed maximal muscular power
tests are often called (maximal) anaerobic power tests. Scores on high-speed muscular strength
tests include the 1RM of explosive exercises (e.g., the power clean, snatch, push jerk), the height
of a vertical jump, and the time to sprint up a staircase (e.g., Margaria-Kalamen test) (69, 100, 103,
124, 126). Because explosive exercise tests take about 1 second while low-speed maximal strength
tests generally require 2 to 5 seconds to complete, phosphocreatine and adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) stored in the active muscle(s) are the primary energy sources for both types of tests.
Maintaining correct technique or form is also important when measuring anaerobic power for both
performance validity and safety reasons.
Most maximal muscular strength tests involve relatively slow movement speeds
and therefore reflect low-speed strength. Assessment of high-speed muscular
strength can involve measuring the 1RM of explosive resistance training exercises
or the height of a vertical jump.
Power output reflects the interplay between force and velocity. The height of a jump is a function
of the force applied to the ground that is greater than the athlete’s body weight over the time it
was applied (this is referred to as net impulse) while he or she extends the ankles, knees, and hips
to propel upward. A larger net impulse (force × time) leads to a higher velocity at which the athlete
leaves the ground. An athlete may not improve in jump height after gaining body weight during a
resistance training cycle, making it appear that power output is unchanged. However, because the
athlete is heavier and propels the body to the same height, indicating the same takeoff velocity, an
increase in power output is likely. This applies to any test in which body weight is manipulated
(e.g., running up stairs). Moving a heavier body at the same speed requires a higher power output.
It is up to the strength and conditioning professional to interpret the interplay between changes in
body weight, velocity, and power output accordingly, because for some athletes, such as those from
collision-based sports, gains in absolute power through weight gain may be beneficial, but for
athletes who benefit primarily from moving at high absolute velocities, a reduction in velocity owing
to weight gain may be detrimental.
An alternative class of anaerobic power tests involves the use of a cycle ergometer. This type of
test can be advantageous for the strength and conditioning professional in some injury situations in
which running is restricted or when the athlete participates in a non-bodyweight-support sport such
as rowing or cycling. The most commonly used test of this type is the Wingate anaerobic test. A
field test protocol involves use of a cycle ergometer with mechanical means of adjusting resistance
and measuring pedal revolutions (i.e., revolutions per second). In a laboratory setting, an
electronically instrumented ergometer can simplify parameter measurement and improve accuracy.
Typical protocols involve a basic warm-up followed by a 30-second test interval (39). In this test,
resistance is applied quickly after the individual reaches a near-maximal pedaling rate (typically 90-
110 rpm). The resistance applied is proportional to body weight (e.g., 7.5%); the percentage is
greater for trained athletes than for individuals with less training. Work performed is determined
from the resistance value and number of pedal revolutions. Power is generally calculated as work
divided by time for each 5-second time interval during the 30-second test. Parameters typically
766
