However, to only increase the remaining extensive endurance
session of 32 miles by 10% would only result in an increase of about
3 miles or, assuming they ride at an average of 18 miles per hour, an
increase of 10 minutes, from 1 hour 46 minutes to 1 hour 56
minutes. Instead, given the low impact and intensity of exercise and
the time involved, the duration of this extensive endurance ride may
reasonably and safely be extended by 15 to 20 minutes (i.e., about 6
miles), which would equate to an increase of approximately 20%.
But, as stated previously, this increase above the recommended 10%
should be done cautiously, with injury and overtraining monitoring
systems implemented, and only for a short period of time with an
appropriate increase in recovery time and techniques reflective of
the increased stress on the body. This type of planned increase in
training frequency, intensity, or duration may be referred to as short-
term functional overreaching.
An important point regarding training duration progression is that
it is often recommended to use predicted time to set the duration of
a training session rather than distance. This is because training time
factors in the effects of terrain and environmental conditions,
whereas distance does not. For example, if an athlete runs 10 miles
over a flat course in 1 hour and 10 minutes, and then runs a hilly
11-mile course the following week in a much slower time of 1 hour
and 58 minutes, even though the prescribed distance only increased
by 10%, the time taken was considerably greater (+48 minutes =
65% increase) which is too much for a week-to-week progression.
Consequently, discretion needs to be used with respect to which
training variable is increased and by how much. Further, to again
avoid symptoms of overtraining or injury, only one training variable
should be increased at a time.
Progression of training frequency may be limited by constraints
such as school, work, and family commitments. It may not be
possible for the athlete to train every day or to incorporate more
than one training session each day. The duration of each training
session is limited by the same constraints. In these cases, to elicit
1534
