these muscle fibers. These action potentials continue down T-tubules
to eventually catalyze the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum as discussed earlier in this chapter. These events ultimately
lead to all the muscle fibers within the motor unit to simultaneously
contract and develop force. There is no evidence to date suggesting
that an active motor unit only activates a portion of the muscle
fibers to contract. Similarly, no evidence to date suggests that
individual muscle fibers can be partially activated within an active
motor unit. Hence, the all-or-none principle has been generally
used to describe this phenomenon; specifically, the activation of any
given motor neuron will lead to the activation and contraction of all
of the muscle fibers it innervates.
Each action potential traveling down a motor neuron results in the
rapid activation of the muscle fibers within the motor unit. The brief
contraction that occurs in response to one action potential is referred
to as a twitch. Although calcium release from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum during a twitch is sufficient to allow for actin-myosin
crossbridging to occur, a brief twitch (which lasts milliseconds) does
not enable a high level of force to be developed given that calcium is
rapidly sequestered back to the sarcoplasmic reticulum and the
muscle fiber relaxes (figure 1.8a). If a second twitch is elicited from
the motor neuron before the innervated muscle fibers completely
relax, forces generated from the two twitches summate, resulting in
a greater force relative to that which is produced by a single twitch
(figure 1.8b). Decreasing the time interval between twitches results
in an even greater force summation, and a high activation frequency
leads to the merging of twitches in what has been termed unfused
and fused tetanic contractions (figure 1.8c and d). The force
generated by a motor unit during fused tetanic contractions (i.e., the
maximal tetanic force) is the maximal force that the motor unit can
develop (8). The ability of motor units to sustain this type of
contraction (along with the size of muscle fibers and motor unit
recruitment patterns) is likely one of the key determinants of
maximal force and power outputs during athletic endeavors.
57
