Youth Populations
The National Strength and Conditioning Association considers long-
term athletic development as the development of athleticism
over time, with an aim to enhance physical fitness, reduce injury
risk, and improve mental and physical health and well-being (137).
The concept of regularly participating in activities that enhance
athleticism is relevant for people of all ages. However, over the past
two decades, there has been a growing focus on long-term athletic
development programs, particularly for youth populations (137).
Athletic development models that encompass multiple modes of
training have been proposed previously in the literature. For
example, Lloyd and Oliver (141) proposed the youth physical
development (YPD) model, which provides training guidelines for
males and females (figure 7.1a and 7.1b). The YPD model is based
on the notion that all components of fitness are trainable at all
stages of development, and therefore training programs should be
multifaceted in nature to develop multiple dimensions of athleticism.
Crucially, the model promotes a consistent focus on the
simultaneous development of muscle strength and motor skill
competency, which provide the foundations for overall athleticism
(137). The model also supports children engaging in some form of
physical activity and preparatory conditioning early in life to take
advantage of the heightened neuroplasticity associated with early
childhood development (88). Similarly, training prescription should
transition from low structure and movement exploration early in a
child’s development to a more structured and targeted approach as
individuals accumulate training experience and move toward later
stages of development.
However, several authors have also established more detailed
development models for individual components of fitness, such as
agility (144), speed (176), power (155), and endurance (104), and
specific modes of training, such as motor skills (194), resistance
training (91), plyometrics (140), and weightlifting (168). While each
386
