depends on the structure of the training program. For example, an
18-month resistance training program in middle-aged and older men
led to significant increases in section modulus, a measure of bone
strength, as well as CSA and areal BMD (aBMD) at the femoral neck,
as assessed by QCT (102). However, adaptation begins within the
first few workouts. The process of osteogenesis involves secretion of
substances into the blood (substances specific to bone only) that can
be measured. Therefore, any elevation in an osteogenic marker can
be recognized as an early indicator of bone formation and
presumably a precursor to increased BMD, provided that the
stimulus is maintained over a long training period.
Principles of Training to Increase Bone
Strength
Anaerobic training programs that have the objective to stimulate
bone growth need to incorporate specificity of loading, speed and
direction of loading, sufficient volume, appropriate exercise
selection, progressive overload, and variation (30). Specificity of
loading demands the use of exercises that directly load the
particular region of interest of the skeleton. If the body interprets
these forces as new or novel, they will stimulate bone growth in the
area that is receiving the strain. For example, running may be a
good stimulus for increased BMD in the femur but the wrong choice
for promoting mineral deposits when one is trying to strengthen the
wrist. The concept of specificity of loading becomes particularly
important when a strength and conditioning professional prescribes
exercises to increase bone mass in regions of the skeleton most
commonly affected by osteoporosis—a disease in which BMD and
bone mass become reduced to critically low levels. Research
indicates that high-impact cyclical loading exercises for the lower
body, such as gymnastics (161), volleyball, or basketball (47),
selectively increase BMD at clinically relevant sites such as the hip
and spine more than lower-impact activities do. Additionally,
increases in BMD may be seen in highly trained college athletes
313
