relevant cues associated with the lift, such as foot placement, back
position, point of visual focus, and knee angle during a squat. This
strategy can reduce distractions, which often deter optimal effort.
Such focusing strategies can promote mental consistency during the
preparatory state, which in turn can promote physical consistency—
the hallmark of a skilled athlete.
It is also important to note that the ability to focus attention on
task-relevant cues and to control distraction is a skill that can be
learned and that improves with increased experience. According to
Fitts and Posner’s (17) classic theory, the athlete progresses through
three stages when learning new motor skills. The first stage, termed
the cognitive stage, is characterized by effortful and conscious
regulation of the movement. That is, the athlete has to think about
the details of the task. During the second stage, the associative
stage, the athlete must focus on the task but is less concerned with
the details of the movement. Finally, the athlete achieves the stage
of automaticity, during which the mind is relaxed and the skill is
executed automatically without thinking. Assuming proper instruction
and coaching, the relaxed mind focuses only on what is relevant to
the task at that moment and, at the same time, automatically filters
out all irrelevant cues. Attaining automaticity of action and the clarity
of thought that often accompanies it is a goal for many athletes.
Attentional Styles
Nideffer (41) formulated an important concept in sport psychology
when he theorized that individuals tend to experience shifting
categories of attentional styles during performance. These categories
are characterized by two dimensions: direction (internal–external)
and width (broad–narrow). The first dimension refers to an
introspective versus an externally oriented perspective, whereas the
second dimension refers to an integrative (expansive) versus a
highly selective orientation. These dimensions each occur on
overlapping continuums, creating four quadrants of attentional
focus: broad external, in which the athlete assesses the situation by
488
