than the sum of the forces they produce when contracting
unilaterally. Research has shown that the corresponding EMG
activity is lower during bilateral contractions (61), suggesting
that neural mechanisms are, at least in part, a contributing
factor. With longitudinal bilateral training, the magnitude of the
bilateral deficit is reduced. In fact, trained or stronger
individuals often show a bilateral facilitation effect whereby
an increase in voluntary activation of the agonist muscle
groups is observed during bilateral contraction (64a).
The EMG activity of antagonist muscle groups has been shown to
change in response to anaerobic training during agonist movements.
In most instances, cocontraction of antagonist muscles serves as a
protective mechanism to increase joint stability and reduce the risk
of injury (96). However, when too much antagonist activity opposes
agonist movement, it inappropriately diminishes net force production
at a joint.
A number of studies have shown reduced antagonist coactivation
following resistance training, resulting in an increase in net force
without an increase in agonist motor unit recruitment (71, 130).
Sprint and plyometric training have also been shown to alter the
timing of coactivation (86), although the specific role of altering
antagonist coactivation patterns remains unclear. Greater antagonist
activity may be observed during ballistic movements that require
high levels of joint stability or when people are unfamiliar with a task
and require more inherent stability (48). Antagonist activity has been
reported to increase during unstable exercise activity with
subsequent reduction in agonist activity (19, 144). Behm and
colleagues (19) demonstrated that completing leg extension while
seated on a Swiss ball (i.e., an unstable surface) resulted in 44%
lower quadriceps activation but 29% greater hamstring activation
when compared to a stable condition. Thus, leg extension forces
were 70% lower in unstable than stable conditions.
Similarly, Santana and colleagues (144) demonstrated that
pressing in a stable (bench press) versus unstable (standing cable
297
