Skeletal Musculature
To cause movement or to generate force against external objects,
both ends of each skeletal muscle must be attached to bone by
connective tissue. Traditionally, anatomists define the muscle’s
origin as its proximal (toward the center of the body) attachment
and its insertion as its distal (away from the center of the body)
attachment. Sometimes the origin is defined as the more stationary
structure to which the muscle is attached and the insertion as the
more mobile structure. This definition can lead to a confusing
reversal of the origin and insertion. For example, during a straight-
leg sit-up, the origin of the iliacus muscle is the femur, because of its
relative immobility. The pelvis, being more mobile, is the insertion.
However, during the leg raise exercise, the pelvis is relatively
immobile and would therefore become the origin, while the more
mobile femur would become the insertion. The traditional definition
therefore provides the most consistency.
Muscles are attached to bone in various ways. In fleshy
attachments, which are most often found at the proximal end of a
muscle, muscle fibers are directly affixed to the bone, usually over a
wide area so that force is distributed rather than localized. Fibrous
attachments, such as tendons, blend into and are continuous
with both the muscle sheaths and the connective tissue surrounding
the bone. They have additional fibers that extend into the bone
itself, making for a very strong union.
Virtually all body movements involve the action of more than one
muscle. The muscle most directly involved in bringing about a
movement is called the prime mover, or agonist. A muscle that can
slow down or stop the movement is called the antagonist. The
antagonist assists in joint stabilization and in braking the limb toward
the end of a fast movement, thereby protecting ligamentous and
cartilaginous joint structures from potentially destructive forces.
During throwing, for example, the triceps acts as an agonist,
extending the elbow to accelerate the ball. As the elbow approaches
106
