modes of training into each day. So even though a well-trained athlete may be
capable of completing four or more resistance training sessions per week, the
other time demands of the sport (i.e., competition schedule, technical and
tactical training) may not permit this. When time is constrained, the subdivision
of weekly training volume across multiple short-duration bouts, termed
microdosing, has been suggested as a potentially useful strategy, which may
mitigate the fatigue associated with longer duration, higher volume training
sessions (34, 35).
TABLE 18.7 Resistance Training Frequency Based on the
Sport Season (for a Trained Athlete)
Sport season
Frequency guidelines (sessions per week)
Off-season
4-6
Preseason
3-4
In-season
1-3
Postseason (active rest)
0-3
Data from Stone and O’Bryant (1987); Tesch (1992).
Training Load and Exercise Type
The ability to train more frequently may be enhanced by alternating heavier and
lighter training days (42, 166, 177). As shown in table 18.5, heavy and light
training days may be organized based on the type of exercises that are being
performed regardless of whether the same muscle groups are being used. While
training to failure may lengthen the necessary recovery time between sessions
(59, 117), athletes may not require longer recovery times despite training with
heavier loads if the volume remains low for the selected exercises (5). However,
strength and conditioning professionals should be aware that higher volume
loads can lengthen the necessary recovery time between training sessions (124).
There is also evidence that upper body muscles can recover more quickly from
heavy loading sessions compared to lower body muscles (76). The same is true
regarding an athlete’s ability to recover faster from single-joint exercises
compared to multijoint exercises (158). These research findings may explain
why, for example, powerlifters may schedule only one very heavy deadlift or
squat training session per week.
More importantly, in a recent meta-analysis, Swinton and colleagues (182)
concluded that the most important factor for appropriate adaptations is the
intensity used, with heavy loads (≥80% 1RM) resulting in the greatest increases
in strength and with low to moderate loads (≤30% 1RM) during ballistic tasks
1215
