In-Season
After an unloading week following the preseason, the athlete is ready to begin the
competitive period of training. The in-season period lasts approximately 22
weeks, spanning a time period from November until April (including a four-week
tournament period, although it could last longer). The goals for the in-season are
to maintain and possibly improve strength, power, flexibility, and anaerobic
conditioning. The time constraints of games, skill and strategy practice, and travel
result in a lower volume of off-court training activities. Due to multiple games
each week, resistance training may be limited to 30 minutes, one to three times
per week, consisting of an undulating regimen of varying volume-loads and
relative intensities. Power and basketball-specific nonpower core exercises
predominate, with assistance exercises added for balance. See the sample in-
season program near the end of this chapter. Plyometric sessions should be
alternated with resistance training and conducted once or twice weekly,
depending on the number of games.
On days when no resistance training is scheduled, 15 to 20 minutes of various
short sprint intervals could be performed once or twice weekly during practice.
Speed, agility, and other running conditioning can be incorporated into practice
time, and flexibility training can be part of the practice and game warm-up and
cool-down. Two or three days of rest should be afforded between resistance
training, plyometrics, and sprint interval sessions, depending on the game
schedule. This period is similar to the previous training period in that the majority
of the athlete’s time is spent on skill and strategy development, with the
remainder devoted to conditioning.
The athlete is in good condition from the previous mesocycles, so she should
be able not only to maintain that condition but also to peak again if the team
continues in the conference tournament. If the tournament game schedule does
not allow for more than one resistance training session per week, the athlete
should perform all the week’s power and core exercises (if time allows) and omit
the assistance exercises. Two examples of specific weekly tournament schedules
are presented near the end of this chapter.
Postseason (Active Rest Period)
Following the completion of the competitive season is a (second) transition period
of active rest with no formal or structured workouts. For this example, the
transition period lasts a month (April 15-May 12). The goal of the period is for the
athlete to recuperate physically and psychologically from the long in-season.
Recreational games and fitness activities include swimming, jogging, circuit
weight training, volleyball, racquetball, and informal basketball. All activities are
performed at low intensities with low volumes.
1608
