needed to get a good estimation of average protein intake, since this
does not vary much from day to day (115). The DRIs include the
following:
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)—The average daily
nutrient requirement adequate for meeting the needs of nearly all
(97%-98%) healthy people within each life stage and sex; often
used to plan nutritionally adequate diets for people.
Adequate Intake (AI)—The average daily nutrient intake level
recommended when a RDA cannot be established.
Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL)—The maximum average
daily nutrient level not associated with any adverse health effects.
Intakes above the UL increase potential risk of adverse effects.
(The UL represents intake from all sources including food, water,
and supplements.)
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR)—The average daily
nutrient intake level considered sufficient to meet the needs of
half of the healthy population within each life stage and sex.
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020-2025 has identified
several dietary nutrients that are under-consumed by the public
(males and females in all age groups); these nutrients are identified
as the Nutrients of Public Health Concern and include dietary fiber,
vitamin D, calcium, and potassium (56). Dietary patterns that do not
meet the recommended intakes of fruits, vegetables, and whole
grains are often lacking in adequate dietary fiber and potassium.
More than 90 percent of women and 97 percent of men do not meet
recommended intakes for dietary fiber. Potassium-rich foods include
vegetables, fruits, dairy, and protein foods, particularly white baked
potatoes, acorn squash, cooked spinach, cooked plantains, kiwifruit,
100% orange juice, bananas, and plain nonfat or low-fat yogurt.
Dairy foods, fortified beverages (e.g., soy beverages and orange
juice), and canned sardines and salmon are excellent sources of
calcium, while fatty fish, fortified beverages (e.g., milk, orange juice,
soy beverages), and fortified yogurt are excellent sources of vitamin
546
