Dispelling the Fears of Resistance Training
for Older Adults
Despite the publicized benefits of resistance exercise for older adults,
misperceptions remain about the notion of lifting weights. Literature has noted the
phenomenon of a “fear of resistance exercise,” which can lead to older adults
demonstrating avoidance behavior to resistance exercise due to apprehension,
anxiety, or a lack of confidence (4). Similarly, a lack of awareness or understanding
can be a barrier to older adults participating in resistance exercise, which
underlines the importance of correct education and the promotion of individualized
approaches (31, 109). To dispel the fears of resistance training, certain key
messages should be promoted to older populations:
Resistance training can cause injury to the musculoskeletal system
in older adults.
False! When programs are technique focused, individualized, and designed and
delivered by appropriately qualified professionals, resistance training is a safe and
effective mode of training for older adults and can promote positive adaptations in
both muscle and bone (76).
Resistance training is not safe for older adults with cardiovascular
or musculoskeletal contraindications.
False! Resistance training can easily be modified to accommodate for such
contraindications. Initially training at lower volumes and intensities, avoiding the
Valsalva maneuver, reducing ranges of motion, and simplifying exercise variants
are some of the ways in which prescription can account for contraindications and
help develop confidence in older adults (76).
Resistance training takes too much time.
False! Improvement in muscle strength and function can be achieved from
exposures to a minimal dose program (e.g., ≤60 mins/session, 2 days/week) (75).
Exercise “snacking,” defined as multiple short bouts (e.g., <10 mins) of muscle
strengthening exercise, has also been shown to promote adaptations in basic
function in older adults (185, 234).
Resistance training requires access to a fitness center.
False! Improvements in both health- and skill-related components of fitness have
been realized by older adults following exposure to home-based resistance
exercise. Notably, supervised training is preferable; however, home-based muscle
strengthening activities can provide some form of meaningful adaptation (32).
Resistance training will make older adults too muscular.
False! Appropriately prescribed resistance training can stimulate gains in muscle
strength without significantly adding muscle bulk. Maintaining or increasing muscle
431
