Because there is an apparent alignment of the functional
characteristics of fiber types (e.g., fiber size, force capacity, and
fatigue resistance) and motor unit properties, such that in mixed
muscles low-threshold motoneurons typically innervate type I fibers
and high-threshold motoneurons innervate type II fibers, it is
necessary that high-force and/or high-fatigue conditions are used to
maximize phenotypic adaptations across all fiber types. Accordingly,
significant and consistent activation via a consistent training stimulus
at appropriate volume is necessary for the initiation of these
adaptive processes to translate to significant hypertrophy as
observed by enlarged CSA of the intact muscle. Typically, type II
fibers manifest greater increases in size than type I fibers; thus the
magnitude of hypertrophy is not uniform between the two major
fiber types (68). In fact, it has been argued that the ultimate
potential for hypertrophy may reside in the relative proportion of
type II fibers within a given athlete’s muscles (165). That is, athletes
who possess a relatively large proportion of fast-twitch fibers may
have a greater potential for increasing muscle mass than individuals
possessing predominantly slow-twitch fibers.
Fiber Type Transitions
The pattern of neural stimulation dictates the extent to which fiber
type adaptations occur following anaerobic training. Muscle fibers
are theoretically positioned on a continuum from the least oxidative
to the most oxidative type (see figure 5.3 and the description of
muscle fiber types in chapter 1). The continuum is as follows: IIx,
IIax, IIa, IIac, IIc, Ic, and I, with a concomitant myosin heavy chain
(MHC) expression (i.e., MHC IIx, IIa, and I) (11, 157). Although the
proportions of type I and II fibers are partially genetically
determined (132, 154a), changes within each subtype can occur
following anaerobic training. With training and activation of the high-
threshold motor units, a transition from type IIx to IIa fiber type
occurs (26). In other words, type IIx muscle fibers change their
myosin adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) isoform content and
304
