muscle fiber capillary density has been observed in response to
aerobic endurance training and is a function of the volume and
intensity of training. In addition to delivering oxygen, nutrients, and
hormones, the capillary circulation provides the means for removing
heat and metabolic by-products. Subsequently, increasing capillary
density decreases the diffusion distance for oxygen and metabolic
substrates, enabling an improved exchange during subsequent
aerobic endurance training and performances (88).
The implication of the abovementioned changes is that they
increase an aerobic endurance athlete’s ability to improve his or her
maximal oxygen uptake, which is of paramount importance for
optimal aerobic endurance performance. The reason for this is that a
close relationship exists between maximal cardiac output and
maximal oxygen uptake, the latter being the product of maximum
cardiac output and arteriovenous oxygen difference (108). More
simply, an increase in maximal oxygen uptake means more oxygen is
delivered to and extracted by the working muscles, thereby
providing an increase in exercise intensity and ultimately
performance.
While not related to aerobic endurance performance outcomes, it
is also worth noting that a common cardiovascular adaptation
following aerobic endurance training is a lower resting heart rate.
The normal discharge rate of the sinoatrial (SA) node ranges from
60 to 80 times per minute. Aerobic endurance training results in a
significantly slower discharge rate due to an increase in
parasympathetic tone. Increased stroke volume also affects the
resting heart rate, because more blood is pumped per contraction,
so the heart needs to contract less frequently to meet the same
cardiac output. Aerobic endurance training can increase the heart’s
ability to pump blood per contraction at rest and thus may account
for some of the significant bradycardia (slower heart rate)
observed in highly conditioned aerobic endurance athletes, whose
resting heart rates commonly range from 40 to 60 beats/min (58,
108). In addition to having low resting heart rates, aerobic
344
