Pleural pressure is the pressure in the narrow space between
the lung pleura and the chest wall pleura (membranes enveloping
the lungs and lining the chest walls). This pressure is normally
slightly negative. Because the lung is an elastic structure, during
normal inspiration the expansion of the chest cage can pull on the
surface of the lungs and create a more negative pressure, thus
enhancing inspiration. During expiration, the events are essentially
reversed (41).
Alveolar pressure is the pressure inside the alveoli when the
glottis is open, and no air is flowing into or out of the lungs. In fact,
in this instance the pressure in all parts of the respiratory tree is the
same all the way to the alveoli and is equal to the atmospheric
pressure. To cause inward flow of air during inspiration, the pressure
in the alveoli must fall to a value slightly below atmospheric
pressure. During expiration, alveolar pressure must rise above
atmospheric pressure (41).
During normal respiration at rest, only 3% to 5% of the total
energy expended by the body is required for pulmonary ventilation.
During very heavy exercise, however, the amount of energy required
can increase to as much as 8% to 15% of total body energy
expenditure, especially if the person has any degree of increased
airway resistance, as occurs with exercise-induced asthma.
Precautions, including physician evaluation of the athlete, are often
recommended, depending on the potential level of impairment.
Exchange of Respiratory Gases
With ventilation, oxygen diffuses from the alveoli into the pulmonary
blood, and carbon dioxide diffuses from the blood into the alveoli.
The process of diffusion is a simple random motion of molecules
moving in opposite directions through the alveolar capillary
membrane. The energy for diffusion is provided by the kinetic
motion of the molecules themselves. Net diffusion of the gas occurs
from the region of high concentration to the region of low
concentration. The rates of diffusion of the two gases depend on
81
