neuromuscular training effects. Weightlifting exercises such as the
snatch and the clean and jerk are effective for improving the ability
to produce high accelerations against heavy resistance (32).
Acceleration and deceleration are characteristic of virtually all
natural movements. For example, sprinting requires the athlete’s
arms and legs to go through repeated cycles of acceleration and
deceleration. Throwing a baseball, discus, shot, or javelin all involve
sequences of body movements that accelerate the objects to high
release speeds. Because acceleration is a particular kind of
movement pattern, training with accelerative movements can
provide specificity of training. That is why explosive exercises, such
as the power clean and high pull, are used in training for many
different sports in which the leg and hip muscles provide force for
accelerating the body. The bracketing technique, in which the
athlete performs the sport movement with less than normal and
greater than normal resistance, is another form of acceleration
training. According to the force–velocity relationship of muscle, a
shot-putter who trains with an extra-heavy shot develops greater
forces during the accelerative movement than when using the
normal shot because the inertia of the heavier implement forces the
muscle to contract at relatively low velocity. When a relatively light
shot is used, the lower inertia of the shot enables the putter to
accelerate the shot more rapidly and to reach a higher speed of
release, thereby training the neuromuscular system to operate within
desired acceleration and velocity ranges. Although the principle of
increasing or decreasing the load during a movement as described
has the theoretical basis for increasing acceleration capacity through
the aforementioned methods, one should also consider the influence
that such changes in loading have during highly specific or
technique-oriented activities such as throwing or sprinting. For
example, changing implement loading could have some negative
consequences on technique since the body needs time to adjust the
motor pattern for that particular movement with the new load.
155
