and a general plateau in the natural strength development of girls
during adolescence (139, 146). On average, peak strength is usually
attained by age 20 in untrained women and between the ages of 20
and 30 in untrained men (146).
An important factor related to the expression of muscular strength
in children is the development of the nervous system. If myelination
of nerve fibers (motor neurons) is absent or incomplete, fast
reactions and skilled movements cannot be successfully performed,
and high levels of strength and power are impossible. As the
nervous system continues to develop with age, children improve
their performance in skills that require coordination, balance, agility,
speed, strength, and power. Since the myelination of many motor
neurons is incomplete until sexual maturation, children should not be
expected to respond to training in the same way or to reach the
same skill level as adults until they reach full neural maturity (127).
However, children are well placed for skill development given the
heightened neuroplasticity associated with childhood. This stage of
development involves the process of pruning and strengthening of
the 
synaptic 
pathways 
(88), 
which, 
with 
the 
appropriate
environment and activities, enable children to refine motor control
strategies and enhance skill acquisition. International consensus
proposes that all youth should be exposed to training programs that
provide an opportunity to develop a broad range of fitness
components to build well-rounded youth (17, 137). However, given
that childhood is a time when the corticospinal tissue is plastic, and
that neuromuscular coordination and force production are governed
by neural activation and control, children should primarily focus on
the development of motor skill competency and muscular strength
because these qualities will serve as foundations of athleticism and a
lifetime of moderate to vigorous physical activity (137). Crucially,
coordination and muscular strength should not be viewed as distinct
qualities but as synergistic components of motor skill performance
(30). Therefore, practitioners should seek to train these qualities
397
