Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (RED-S)
Relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S) encompasses various
physiological dysfunctions resulting from low energy availability (LEA), where an
athlete’s energy intake does not match the energy expended during exercise.
This mismatch affects metabolic rate, menstrual function, bone health, immunity,
protein synthesis, and cardiovascular health, among others. This phenomenon
was initially recognized in 2014 with the international RED-S consensus
statement (88) and has continued to encompass additional research. For more
details on the implications of RED-S, see these previous papers (25, 89).
LEA is quantified by energy availability (EA), calculated as energy intake
minus exercise energy expenditure, relative to fat-free mass (FFM). Optimal EA
for healthy function is around 45 kilocalories per kilogram FFM per day, while
severe perturbations can occur below 30 kilocalories per kilogram FFM per day
(25, 88). LEA adversely affects various systems, including the endocrine system,
leading to disruptions in hormonal balance, particularly in female athletes, and
possibly in males, though male athletes appear to be more physiologically
resilient at lower EA values. LEA may be one of the strongest indicators of injury
risk for athletes (133), with oligomenorrheic and functional hypothalamic
amenorrheic 
(FHA) 
athletes 
reporting 
higher 
percentages 
of 
severe
musculoskeletal injuries resulting in greater durations of time lost from sport
(134).
Menstrual dysfunction, including amenorrhea, is a common consequence of
sustained LEA in female athletes, due to the impact on the hypothalamic–
pituitary–gonadal (HPG) axis. Chronic LEA also compromises bone health,
leading to decreased bone mineral density and increased risk of bone stress
injuries, particularly in sports with high energy demands. Metabolic changes,
including decreased RMR, and hematological alterations, such as iron deficiency,
are also associated with LEA. Growth and development, cardiovascular function,
gastrointestinal health, and immune function are also affected, particularly at
very low levels of LEA and over longer periods of time. Psychological implications
include increased risk of depression, eating disorders, and impaired stress
management.
Performance-wise, LEA can impair recovery, muscle function, and glycogen
storage, affecting physical and psychological capacity, training quality, and injury
risk (89). However, despite these associations, direct evidence of LEA’s impact on
sport performance is limited. Studies on elite athletes suggest that LEA may
impair sport performance indirectly by acutely affecting fuel storage and use
(132), reducing training volume, and increasing risk of illness (35, 36). Yet
further research with robust protocols is needed to fully understand the acute
650
