performed but this time replacing the positive displacement value
(0.541 m) with a negative displacement value (−0.541 m). Because
the only thing that has changed is movement direction, and because
the range of motion should be the same, the lowering phase work is
−318.43 J. This means that the power achieved during the lowering
phase will be negative too. So far, we have considered how the
application of force enables us to perform linear movement and work
(movement over straight and curved paths). In the next section, we
will explore how force applied to an object or body part results in
rotational movement, such as when a segment of the body (e.g., the
forearm) rotates around a joint like the elbow.
Relating Angular and Linear Motion
In biomechanics, we call body parts starting at a joint (e.g., the lower arm from
the elbow) segments. If we flex the elbow to curl a dumbbell, the lower arm
moves closer to the upper arm and the elbow angle decreases. The opposite is
true when we lower the dumbbell. How far the dumbbell moves depends on the
lower-arm length and change in elbow angle. If someone with a 0.32 meters-long
(1.05 ft) lower arm flexes the elbow by 1.88 radians (about 108 degrees), the
dumbbell will move 0.60 meters (1.97 ft). Increasing the elbow flexion to 2.27
radians (about 130 degrees) increases the dumbbell movement to 0.73 meters
(2.40 ft). Try this with different segment lengths and joint angular displacements.
Rotation Force and Movement
Because the body is a system of levers (see Levers of the
Musculoskeletal System), most movement is borne from the rotation
of different parts of the body, all frequently contributing to more
general movement. We use slightly different conventions to describe
rotation (or angular movement), the forces that cause it, and its
results. When the force of a contracting muscle (or muscles) causes
the movement of a body segment, such as the forearm as it rotates
around the elbow, we can quantify this by multiplying the force
required to cause the movement by the length of the forearm and
the sine of the joint angle (e.g., elbow, figure 2.4, page 30). The
result is a torque (τ), although moment is frequently used
135
