example, when older adults were confined to complete bed rest (a
catabolic state) for 10 days, it was reported that the subjects who
were supplemented with 3 grams of HMB per day lost significantly
less lean body mass (lost only 0.37 lb [0.17 kg]) as compared to
those subjects who were supplemented with a placebo (lost 4.5 lb
[2.04 kg]) (55). Other research findings are in agreement with these
observations and have shown that HMB exerts an anticatabolic effect
and suppresses muscle damage (130).
In previously untrained individuals initiating a resistance training
program lasting four to eight weeks, HMB has been shown to exert
significantly greater improvements in strength and lean body mass
as compared to a placebo (158, 164). The muscle damage and
soreness that result from resistance training are predictably greater
in those who have little training experience as compared to
individuals who have engaged in resistance training for longer
periods of time. Given HMB’s ability to suppress muscle damage and
muscle protein breakdown, it is not surprising that HMB is effective
for people beginning a new training program.
The ergogenic effects of HMB in trained individuals are less
conclusive. Studies using resistance-trained or competitive athletes
were unable to duplicate the results seen in a recreationally trained
population using similar supplementation schedules (160, 179).
However, many of the studies investigating the effects of HMB on
strength and lean body mass in trained individuals were of short
duration (less than five weeks) and lacked the presence of a
periodized, high-intensity training program. In order for HMB to be
effective, it may be essential to provide novel stimuli to individuals to
induce either muscle damage or stimulate elevated protein
breakdown. It appears that trained individuals instructed not to
change their programs do not benefit from HMB. Investigations that
have provided an adequate training stimulus in trained individuals
have also reported increases in maximal strength and lean body
mass as compared to placebo treatments (158, 164).
705
