COMMENTS
aThe in-season will address both of
these goals through a combination
of appropriate exercise selection
and volume–load assignments.
COMMENTS
bDue to the extreme physical
demands of American football,
this athlete’s postseason
training volume was greater
than is often assigned for the
active rest phase of a typical
program.
COMMENTS
cBecause this athlete just began
his resistance training program, his
frequency was limited to 3×/week
in the off-season rather than the
4×/week that are typically
completed by better-trained
individuals.
The information in this table reflects one approach to evaluating the requirements of a sport and profiling
an athlete.
A common application of assistance exercises is for injury prevention and
rehabilitation, because these exercises often isolate a specific muscle or muscle
group. The muscles that are predisposed to injury from the unique demands of a
sport skill (e.g., the shoulder external rotators for overhand pitching) or those
that require reconditioning after an injury (e.g., a quadriceps contusion) can be
specifically conditioned by an assistance exercise. However, it is important that
the chosen exercises improve a physical characteristic within the program
(flexibility, strength, etc.) and that the professional prescribes them appropriately
with specific volumes and intensities.
Structural and Power Exercises
A core exercise that emphasizes loading the spine directly (e.g., back squat) or
indirectly (e.g., power clean) can be further described as a structural
exercise. More specifically, a structural exercise involves muscular stabilization
of posture during performance of the lifting movement (e.g., maintaining a rigid
torso and a neutral spine during the back squat). Practitioners should be mindful
that during traditional structural exercises (e.g., squat and bench press), a
substantial portion of the range of motion results in deceleration (47, 93, 119).
As such, ballistic tasks that emphasize movement velocity (e.g., loaded jumps)
should be programmed to emphasize power development. A structural exercise
that is performed very quickly or explosively is considered a power exercise.
Typically, power exercises are assigned to athletes when they are appropriate for
the athlete’s sport-specific training priorities. It should be noted, however, that in
weak athletes, or those with a low training age, emphasizing strength
development has been shown to enhance power output to an equal or greater
extent than ballistic training (26, 28, 29). Semi-ballistic exercises, such as
weightlifting exercises and their derivatives, can also be used effectively for the
development of power because they provide the potential to emphasize a
velocity- or force-dominant stimulus (figure 18.6) (21, 170-173). Such a diverse
range of exercises also permits substantial variation and the opportunity to
1205
