strength and power while managing the fatigue associated with a frequent
competition schedule. Generally, a maintenance program is marked by moderate-
to high-intensity training (e.g., 85%-93% 1RM) at low to moderate volumes. At
the microcycle level, the training loads are modulated based on the training,
travel, and competitive schedule. Careful monitoring of the athlete’s performance
capacity and recovery is critical during the team-sport athlete’s competitive
period.
The competitive period includes peaking and maintenance. For
peaking, athletes use very high to low intensities (50% to ≥93% of
the 1RM) and very low volume (1 to 3 sets of 1 to 3 repetitions) for
one to two weeks. For maintenance, athletes modulate training
between moderate and high intensities (85%-93% of the 1RM)
with moderate volumes (about 2 to 5 sets of 3 to 6 repetitions).
Second Transition Period (Active Rest)
Between the competitive season and the next annual training plan or the
preparatory period of a macrocycle, a second transition period is often used to
create a linkage (89). This period is sometimes referred to as an active rest or
restoration period and generally lasts for one to four weeks (38). It is important
to note that if active rest is extended for a prolonged duration, athletes will
require a much longer preparatory period to regain their performance capacities
(39). Therefore, it is generally recommended that the second transition period
last no longer than four weeks unless an athlete requires additional time to
recover from an injury. During this period, aggressive training immediately after
the peak performance or end of the maintenance phase should be avoided so
athletes can rehabilitate injuries and rest physically and mentally (12-14). For
example, a sprinter may engage in recreational activities such as volleyball, racket
sports, and swimming in a leisurely manner and perform very low-volume, non–
sport-specific resistance training with very low loads. A secondary use of the
active rest concept is to structure one-week breaks between long phases (three
weeks) or periods of training. The purpose is to create an unloading week to
prepare the body for the subsequent phase or period of training. The practice of
reducing the training load via the reduction of training intensity and volume is
believed by many strength and conditioning professionals to reduce overtraining
potential.
The second transition (active rest) provides a period of time in
which athletes can rehabilitate injuries and refresh both physically
and mentally before beginning a new annual training plan or
1599
