long-term rehabilitation. In the United States, physical therapists
with expertise in sport injury management or orthopedics may
become board certified through the American Board of Physical
Therapy Specialties (ABPTS) and obtain the Sports Certified
Specialist (SCS) or Orthopedic Certified Specialist (OCS) credentials,
respectively. These board-certified specialists are more commonly
becoming 
participants 
in 
the 
evaluation, 
treatment, 
and
rehabilitation of acutely injured athletes and often serve in the dual
capacity of team athletic trainer and physical therapist.
The strength and conditioning professional typically focuses
on strength, power, and performance enhancement. The strength
and conditioning professional also plays a valuable role within the
allied health team and is an integral part of the rehabilitation and
reconditioning process. Ideally, this person should be certified by the
National Strength and Conditioning Association as a Certified
Strength and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS) to ensure that he or she
has the knowledge and background to contribute to the
rehabilitation process. In consultation with the athletic trainer or
physical therapist, this professional uses an understanding of the
proper technique and application of several types of exercise (e.g.,
resistance, plyometric, and aerobic exercise) to develop a
reconditioning program to ready the injured athlete for return to
competition. Furthermore, strength and conditioning professionals
possess an extensive understanding of the role that biomechanics
play in a wide variety of sports and activities, which may allow them
to suggest exercises for advanced rehabilitation and reconditioning
of many injuries.
Additionally, the allied health team often includes specialized
members who assist with the postacute rehabilitation and
reconditioning of injured athletes. An exercise physiologist has a
formal background in the exercise sciences and uses his or her
expertise to assist with the design of a conditioning program that
carefully considers the body’s metabolic response to exercise and the
ways in which that reaction aids the healing process. Because proper
1634
