exhaustion in those who regularly include carbohydrate in their diets, when
consumed 3 or more hours before competition (33, 146).
A crossover study examined whether a precompetition high-carbohydrate
meal combined with a carbohydrate-electrolyte sports drink consumed during
exercise improved aerobic endurance running capacity (70% V̇ O2max until
exhaustion) more than the sports drink alone (28). The scientists had men
perform three treadmill runs, each separated by one week, after an overnight
fast followed by a carbohydrate meal 3 hours before exercise in addition to a
carbohydrate-electrolyte sports drink during running; a carbohydrate meal 3
hours before exercise and water during running; or a low-calorie placebo drink
(same flavor as the sport drink) 3 hours before exercise and water during
running. They replicated the same diet for the two-day period before each trial.
No differences were noted in average daily caloric intake between the three
trials. Consumption of the high-carbohydrate preexercise meal improved aerobic
endurance running capacity by 9% compared to the placebo drink before
exercise and water during the run. However, the high-carbohydrate meal plus
sport drink during the run improved aerobic endurance capacity by 22%
compared to the placebo beforehand and sport drink during the run. These
results indicate that a high-carbohydrate preexercise or precompetition meal can
help improve aerobic endurance running capacity (28).
Aerobic endurance athletes who are not chronically adapted to a low-
carbohydrate diet and start exercise with depleted glycogen stores will break
down muscle to use amino acids for energy and may acutely suppress immune
and central nervous system functioning. Therefore, a high-carbohydrate
preexercise meal can help attenuate the breakdown of skeletal muscle while also
providing carbohydrate for immune and nervous system functioning (23, 76).
Over time, adaptation to chronic consumption of a low-carbohydrate diet
increases the body’s reliance on its vast storage of fat as a fuel source during
exercise, though training with low glycogen stores may suppress immune and
central nervous system functioning (23, 53). In a study examining protein
catabolism, six subjects rode a cycle ergometer for 1 hour at 61% V̇ O2max after
a carbohydrate loading protocol or carbohydrate depletion. In the
carbohydrate-depleted state, protein breakdown was calculated at 13.7 grams
per hour, which represented 10.7% of the calories used during exercise (76).
It is clear that a preexercise meal consumed hours before competition can
help improve aerobic endurance performance. However, extremely early morning
start times can complicate the desire to feed with a concurrent desire for
maximum sleep. For instance, a runner who must be at the starting line of a race
at 7:00 a.m. may find that waking up at 3:00 or 4:00 a.m. to eat is not practical.
Athletes who find themselves in this scenario should practice eating small
617
