   10  DROP JUMP
Equipment
A box that may vary in height from 8 to 16 inches (20-40 cm)
Floor with good traction
Measurement equipment such as force plates (with corresponding software on laptop or
tablet), switch mats, optoelectronic systems, and smartphone applications
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. When performing a drop vertical jump, the athlete should step out before free-falling from as
close as possible to the height of the box rather than stepping down (i.e., lowering) or jumping
off (i.e., rising) the box. Box height selection for an athlete can vary but is typically 20
centimeters (8 in.), 30 centimeters (12 in.), or 40 centimeters (16 in.) (figure 14.11a). The
higher the box, the greater the plyometric demand. When using a device that is not flush with
the ground or base of the box when conducting the drop vertical jump test, such as when
using a switch mat, the strength and conditioning professional should measure the box height
from the top of the box to the top surface of the switch mat.
2. The athlete steps out from the box and lands on the floor, force plate, or switch mat (figure
14.11b) and, as quickly as possible, jumps again (figure 14.11c). Drop jumps should be
performed with the athlete attempting to jump with a short ground contact time while still
aiming to jump as high as possible. A short ground contact time is achieved by limiting flexion
of the ankles, knees, and hips while in contact with the ground by adopting high leg stiffness
(high force with shallow range of motion). It is advised that at least 2 to 3 sets are performed.
3. The most reported performance variables following drop vertical jump testing are jump height
(from flight time), ground contact time, and reactive strength index (calculated as jump
height divided by ground contact time) (91). The reactive strength index is often considered an
indication of how well an athlete can recruit the fast component of the stretch-shortening
cycle.
4. Figure 14.12 shows an example of the force–time curve with labels pointing out the peak
vertical ground reaction force, contact time, and flight time when measured with a force plate
testing system.
790
