As stated previously, a body at rest is unprepared for activity, and
in this way a warm-up can be considered a process of preparation
for the upcoming performance. The conventional advice is that a
warm-up should consist of a period of aerobic exercise, followed by
some form of stretching, and ending with a period of activity similar
to the upcoming activity (36). A traditional warm-up program
typically involves two key phases.
The first is a general warm-up period (48), which may consist
of 5 minutes of low-intensity aerobic activity such as jogging,
skipping, or cycling. The aim of this phase is to increase heart rate,
increase and redistribute blood flow, increase deep muscle
temperature, increase respiration rate, and decrease the viscosity of
joint fluids (28). This phase historically has been followed by a
period of general static stretching that aims to replicate the ranges
of motion required for the upcoming activity, although this has been
largely superseded by dynamic stretching protocols (48).
In the traditional approach, following the general warm-up is the
specific warm-up period, which incorporates movements similar to
the biomechanical movement patterns of the athlete’s sport. This
phase should also include rehearsal of the skills to be performed
(97).
The whole warm-up should progress gradually and provide
sufficient intensity to increase muscle and core temperatures without
causing fatigue or reducing energy stores (62). Typically, it should
last between 10 and 20 minutes, depending on the specific
requirements of the context. For example, shorter time periods are
far more common in the majority of training sessions, while longer
time periods are more common in cases in which aspects of the
warm-up are an integral part of the main session or when specific
competition warm-ups are being carried out. The warm-up should
ideally end no more than 15 minutes before the start of the
subsequent activity; after this time the positive effects of the warm-
up start to dissipate (30).
859
