Detraining
Detraining is the term given to a decrement in performance and
loss of the accumulated physiological adaptations following the
cessation of anaerobic training or when there is a substantial
reduction in frequency, volume, intensity, or any combination of
these variables. According to the principles of reversibility, training-
induced adaptations are transient and thus can disappear when the
training load is insufficient or removed completely. The result is a
partial or complete loss of the anatomical, physiological, and
performance adaptations that have been made (123). The
magnitude of these losses is dependent on the length of the
detraining period as well as the initial training status of the
individual.
Following the removal of a training stimulus is a lag time before
the effects of detraining are fully observed. Strength performance in
general is readily maintained for up to four weeks of inactivity, but in
highly trained athletes, eccentric force and sport-specific power may
decline significantly faster (124). In trained weightlifters, removing
the training stimulus for 14 days did not significantly affect 1RM
strength performance in the bench press (−1.7%) and squat
(−0.9%), isometric (−7%) and isokinetic concentric knee extension
force (−2.3%), or vertical jump performance (1.2%) (108). In
recreationally trained men, very little change is seen during the first
six weeks of detraining (92). Longer periods of training cessation are
accompanied by significantly pronounced declines in the strength
performance of strength-trained athletes (124), but this loss is still
limited to 7% to 12% during periods of inactivity ranging from 8 to
12 weeks.
This strength loss is coupled with decreased average maximal
bilateral and unilateral intramuscular EMG. Indeed, strength
reductions appear related to neural mechanisms initially, with
atrophy 
predominating 
as 
the 
detraining 
period 
extends.
Interestingly, the amount of muscle strength retained is rarely lower
333
