to influence the efficacy of using interval training for metabolic
adaptations.
Few studies provide results that can be used to generate
definitive guidelines for choosing specific work-to-rest ratios. One
such study, however, reported aerobic and anaerobic metabolic
variables, total work, and time-to-exhaustion differences between
two different work-to-rest ratios in elite cyclists (119). The cyclists
performed two intermittent protocols that included either a 40:20-
second or a 30:30-second work-to-rest interval to exhaustion at a
fixed work rate. The 40:20-second work-to-rest ratio resulted in
significantly reduced total work and time to exhaustion while
producing higher metabolic values (V̇ O2max, lactate concentration,
ETC). In contrast, the 30:30-second work-to-rest ratio provided
sustained but slightly lower metabolic values for a considerably
longer period of time. Another study manipulated the work variable
via intensity and duration of the work-to-rest ratios. Wakefield and
Glaister (154) reported a greater amount of time above 95%
V̇ O2max during running at an intensity of 105% of V̇ O2max versus
115% of V̇ O2max with a work duration of 30 seconds rather than 20
and 25 seconds (rest = 20 s). When one is determining the proper
work-to-rest ratio for athletes, knowledge of the time intervals,
intensity of work, and recovery periods for each of the energy
systems is critical to maximizing the amount of work that can be
accomplished for a given exercise intensity. For example, after a
bout of maximal exercise that depletes CP stores, the complete
resynthesis of CP is generally 3 to 5 minutes but may take up to 8
minutes (75) even though the half time for CP resynthesis is only
approximately 30 seconds, suggesting that short-duration, high-
intensity exercise requires greater work-to-rest ratios due to the
aerobic mechanisms that replete phosphagen stores (75).
In contrast, as the goals of training change to longer-duration,
lower-intensity tasks, the durations of the work intervals can be
longer; this will lengthen the rest periods and decrease the work-to-
rest ratios. Table 3.6 provides some general guidelines for work-to-
217
