Athletes who choose to use performance-enhancing substances do
so with the hope that they will augment their training adaptations
and ultimately improve their sport performance (181). Ideally,
performance-enhancing substances also support the health of the
athlete and are within the ethical and stated guidelines of the
athlete’s sport. Because of the ethical considerations relating to
unfair advantage during competition and the potential for adverse
events, most athletic governing bodies have generated a list of
substances that are banned from national and international
competition. Athletes caught using such substances can be
suspended or forced to forfeit their medals or both. In situations in
which the athlete tests positive for a banned substance on repeated
occasions, he or she risks a lifetime ban on participation in the given
sport. However, numerous nutritional supplements and ergogenic
aids are permissible and are frequently used by athletes to maximize
performance enhancement. Often the use of these substances is
promoted on the basis of unfounded claims (181). Another concern
that athletes need to be aware of with the use of dietary
supplements is the risk of unintended doping originating from
contaminated products. The presence of undeclared compounds in
the composition of dietary supplements is a serious concern (131).
Thus, it is imperative that the athlete become informed about the
legality of these substances, understand the potential risks
associated with consumption, and know whether scientific research
supports the claims (i.e., the efficacy of the product). The strength
and conditioning professional can greatly assist athletes in this
regard by giving them relevant information related to these issues,
as well as by referring them to nutrition specialists. Although an
ergogenic aid can be any substance, mechanical aid, or training
method that improves sport performance, for the purposes of this
chapter the term refers specifically to pharmacologic aids.
Athletes may try to gain a competitive advantage by using
supplements that are reputed to be ergogenic but are not banned,
or they may knowingly use banned substances in the belief that they
660
