training session. For example, a strength and conditioning professional assigns 3
sets of 6 repetitions in the bench press exercise, and the athlete performs all 6
repetitions in all sets. After several workout sessions (the specific number
depends on many factors), the athlete can complete 8 repetitions in the third
(last) set for two consecutive workouts. In the following training session, the
load for that exercise should be increased. While the 2-for-2 rule may provide
strength and conditioning professionals with a tool to progress load in novice
athletes, this method may eventually promote training to failure because it does
not account for exercise technique, the goals of a given training phase, or
relative intensity. For example, if an athlete modifies his or her technique just to
achieve additional repetitions, an increase in load may not be warranted until
exercise technique becomes more stable. Moreover, programming that allows for
additional repetitions to be performed (i.e., not to failure) may be by design
(176). In this instance, strength and conditioning professionals may plan for
athletes to perform additional repetitions beyond the amount prescribed (i.e.,
RIR) with the goal of providing an overload stimulus while managing fatigue.
Thus, it is advised that the professionals understand the limitations of the 2-for-
2 rule when adjusting the load during training.
Quantity of Load Increases
The decision as to the magnitude of the load increase can be difficult to make,
but table 18.12 provides general recommendations based on the athlete’s
condition (stronger or weaker) and body area (upper or lower body). Despite
these guidelines, the significant variation in training status, volume–loads, and
exercises (type and muscular involvement) greatly influences the appropriate
load increases. To contend with this variability, relative load increases of 2.5% to
10% can be used instead of the absolute values shown in table 18.12. However,
load changes should be specific to the exercise, loading type (e.g., free weights,
elastic bands, dumbbells), and the method of load progression (e.g., percentage
of 1RM, RPE, RIR, SRB).
TABLE 18.12 Examples of Load Increases
Description of the athletea
Body area exercise
Estimated load increaseb
Set-repetition
best increasesc
Weaker, less trained
Upper body
2.5-5 lb (1-2 kg)
5%
aThe strength and conditioning professional will need to determine which of these two
subjective categories applies to a specific athlete.
bThese load increases are appropriate for training programs using approximately 3 sets
of 5 to 10 repetitions. Note that the goal repetitions per set remain constant as the
loads are increased.
cA planned increase per week, but it will be phase specific, could be larger increases.
1242
