note that several other individuals were also exploring these concepts at the same
time, including László Nádori (71), Tudor Bompa (3), and Yuri Verkhoshansky
(102). Later on, American sport scientists Michael H. Stone, Harold O’Bryant, and
John Garhammer adapted the concepts of the early periodization theorists with
special application to strength and power athletes (89, 91).
While the concepts that underpin our understanding of periodization are well
established and are well accepted, confusion still exists in both the scientific (1, 2,
54, 79) and practical (25) literature about what periodization is and how it is used
to guide the training process. At the center of this confusion is the fact that the
terms periodization and programming are often used interchangeably within the
literature (20, 35, 37, 88). While periodization and programming are interrelated,
they represent different management levels of the training process (35, 38).
Specifically, periodization serves as the macro-management level of the training
process, while programming allows for the micro-management of the process
(38). Conceptually, periodization serves as a method for organizing deliberate
practice by providing the scaffold from which programming decisions are made
(60). The objectives targeted by the periodized plan are then aligned with training
cycles (e.g., micro-, meso-, and macrocycles, and annual and multiyear cycles)
(73) and individualized programs are constructed. Programming aligns the
activities undertaken (i.e., modes and methods of training) as part of the training
process with the athlete’s established training goals and the direction of the
training process (41). At the programming level, an integrated monitoring
program is used to fine-tune the training activities by providing information that
can further inform decisions about the training strategies implemented as part of
the athlete’s training program (figure 22.1) (22). In this regard, programming
becomes an operation in strategic thinking, with programmatic decisions being
considered in the context of the athlete’s holistic training program (e.g., physical
training, technical and tactical training, mental skills training, recovery methods,
and nutritional strategies) and the current state (37, 77). Ultimately, when all of
this is taken into account periodization simply serves as an organizational tool for
guiding the direction and structure of the training process.
1580
