FIGURE 14.6 Nordic hamstring test (without an instrumented device).
   6  1RM POWER CLEAN
Note: Because the power clean exercise has high technical demands, two athletes with the same
muscular power capacity can differ greatly in their tested 1RM, lessening the value of the test for
predicting athletic performance.
Equipment
An Olympic-style barbell with a revolving sleeve, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough
total weight to accommodate the maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of
plate sizes to allow for 5-pound (2.3 kg) gradations in weight
A lifting platform or designated area set apart from the rest of the facility for safety
Personnel
One tester/recorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in proper technique for the power clean as described in chapter 16.
2. Warm-up sets are performed and load increments are selected as for the 1RM bench press
test.
3. Refer to figure 18.8 (page 546) for a 1RM testing protocol.
Note: Normative and descriptive data for the 1RM power clean are presented in tables 14.1 through
14.4 near the end of the chapter.
  7   STANDING LONG (BROAD) JUMP
Equipment
A flat jumping area at least 20 feet (6 m) in length, which can be a gym floor, artificial turf,
grass field, or a track
A tape measure at least 10 feet (3 m) long
Duct tape or masking tape
Permissible alternative: a commercial jumping mat premarked in half-inch (1 cm) increments
Personnel
One distance judge, one recorder
Procedure
1. Place a 2- to 3-foot (0.6-0.9 m) length of tape on the floor to serve as a starting line.
2. The athlete stands with the toes just behind the starting line.
3. The athlete performs a countermovement and jumps forward as far as possible.
4. The athlete must land on the feet for the jump to be scored. Otherwise, the trial is repeated.
5. A marker is placed at the back edge of the athlete’s rearmost heel, and the tape measure
determines the distance between the starting line and the mark.
6. The best of three trials is recorded to the nearest 0.5 inch or 1 centimeter.
Note: Normative and descriptive data for the standing long jump are presented in tables 14.8 to
14.10 near the end of the chapter.
  8   VERTICAL JUMP
785
