Repetitions performed in a slow, controlled manner increase the
likelihood that full ROM can be reached. However, when power or
quick-lift exercises (e.g., power clean, push jerk, and snatch) are
performed, an effort should be made to accelerate the bar to a
maximal speed while still maintaining control and proper form
throughout the exercise.
Breathing Considerations
The most strenuous movement of a repetition—typically soon after
the transition from the eccentric phase to the concentric phase—is
referred to as the sticking point. Strength and conditioning
professionals should typically instruct athletes to exhale through the
sticking point and to inhale during the less stressful phase of the
repetition (3, 6, 7). For example, since the sticking point of the
biceps curl exercise occurs about midway through the upward
movement phase (concentric elbow flexion), the athlete should
exhale during this portion. Inhalation, then, should occur as the bar
is lowered back to the starting position. This breathing strategy
applies to most resistance training exercises.
Breath holding may be suggested in some situations, however. For
experienced resistance-trained athletes performing structural
exercises (those that load the vertebral column and therefore place
stress on it) with high loads, the Valsalva maneuver can be
helpful for maintaining proper vertebral alignment and support. As
explained in chapter 2, the Valsalva maneuver involves expiring
against a closed glottis, which, when combined with contracting the
abdomen and rib cage muscles, creates rigid compartments of fluid
in the lower torso and air in the upper torso (i.e., the “fluid ball”).
The advantage of the Valsalva maneuver is that it increases the
rigidity of the entire torso to aid in supporting the vertebral column,
which in turn reduces the associated compressive forces on the disks
during lifting (1, 4, 5, 8). It also helps to establish and maintain a
normal lordotic lumbar spine position (also called a neutral spine)
and erect upper torso position, described in the technique checklists
953
