Other Muscular Adaptations
Resistance training has been shown to increase myofibrillar volume
(107), cytoplasmic density (111), sarcoplasmic reticulum and T-
tubule density (9), sodium–potassium ATPase activity (67), and
increased ribosome biogenesis (54, 172). Collectively, these changes
act to facilitate hypertrophy and enable greater expression of
muscular strength. Sprint training has been shown to enhance
calcium release (129), which assists in increasing speed and power
production by promoting actin and myosin crossbridge formation.
Heavy resistance training has also been shown to reduce
mitochondrial density (112). While the number of mitochondria
remains constant or can slightly increase throughout a training
phase, mitochondrial density is expressed relative to muscle area.
Increases in muscle CSA occur disproportionately to mitochondrial
proliferation, and consequently, the density of mitochondria per unit
volume is typically found to decrease with hypertrophy. Muscle
hypertrophy can result in decreased capillary density by similar
mechanisms, again with the number of capillaries per fiber
increasing somewhat (168, 184). Bodybuilding workouts produce
large hydrogen ion concentrations, but having more capillaries per
fiber may assist in the clearance of metabolites from exercising
muscle (93, 164).
Anaerobic exercise results in substantial reductions in muscle and
blood pH (32), with several mechanisms regulating a change in
acid–base balance during exercise. With adaptations to consistent
acute 
changes 
in 
pH 
during 
training 
(i.e., 
increased 
H+
concentration), buffering capacity can improve. This increased
capacity then allows an athlete to better tolerate the accumulation of
H+ within the working muscle, resulting in delayed fatigue and
greater muscular endurance (152). By its nature, high-intensity
interval training (e.g., sprints and cycling) performed above the
lactate threshold has been shown to significantly increase buffering
capacity by 16% to 38% (21, 152). Elsewhere, athletes competing in
anaerobic team sports have been shown to have higher buffering
307
