Across all protocols, the evidence to support the use of PAPE
exercises is equivocal, with great variation on most modalities. Here
the interaction of potentiation and fatigue will always be a challenge;
for example, the activities that may generate the greatest
potentiation are also those that are likely to result in the greatest
fatigue. Definitive conclusions are made even harder by the variation
in the warm-up used in the studies and whether the positive results
are as much a result of an effective potentiation phase rather than
evidence of PAPE. To further challenge the application of the
phenomenon, it appears that the effects are also highly individual
and relate to the interaction of a range of factors, such as the type
of stimulus, the intensity of the stimulus, the volume of the stimulus,
the time duration between stimulation and application, and the
individual characteristics of the athlete. As a result, definitive
guidelines on the application of PAPE in any warm-up (see the
sidebar) should be considered tentative at best.
Much of the current research has focused on the acute application
of CNS preparation. However, some research suggests that the
positive effects of a bout of high-intensity exercise may last
significantly longer than the windows that have been explored to
date—perhaps up to 48 hours. As a result, the concept of
precompetition priming has been proposed, using a low-volume,
high-intensity session some hours or even days before a competition
to prime the CNS, allowing for the exploitation of a potential residual
force enhancement (45). However, the research on this is limited
and does not fall under the purview of this chapter, where the focus
will be on the use of CNS preparation in a warm-up.
While the use of PAPE in warm-ups may be alluring, the logistical
challenges are many and often preclude effective application (55).
Given the highly individual nature of PAPE, finding a single effective
modality for a team of athletes will be extremely difficult, and as a
result this application may be more suited to individual athletes
rather 
than 
teams. 
Even 
here, 
logistical 
and 
operational
considerations have to be taken into account. Equipment availability
869
