synthesis rate (muscle protein synthesis) and fractional breakdown rate
(breakdown) were measured after a bout of either concentric or eccentric
exercise in four untrained men and four untrained women. The rate of synthesis
increased significantly above resting levels by 112% in the 3-hour period after
exercise, 65% over the 24-hour period after exercise, and 34% over the 48-hour
period after exercise. Muscle breakdown also increased by 31% and 18% in the
3- and 24-hour periods after exercise yet returned to baseline by 48 hours after
exercise (110). Relatively small amounts of carbohydrate, somewhere between
30 and 100 grams, can sufficiently reduce muscle protein breakdown (18, 43).
Although muscle protein breakdown has a role in overall protein balance, muscle
protein synthesis plays a much bigger role in overall protein balance (43).
Supplementing with protein after a muscle-damaging bout of resistance
training increases acute muscle protein synthesis. Varying amounts of protein
have been used after resistance training to stimulate muscle protein synthesis,
though it appears that 20 to 50 grams (providing about 8.5 g-20 g of essential
amino acids) of a high-quality, high-leucine, fast protein (one that leads to a
rapid rise in amino acids in the bloodstream) in younger individuals may
maximally stimulate muscle protein synthesis, while 40 grams or more may be
necessary in older adults (59, 109). Rice protein is an intermediate-speed
leucine-poor protein (though the rise in leucine in the bloodstream appears
quickly after consumption of rice protein); larger doses of rice protein effectively
stimulate muscle protein synthesis to the same extent as a higher-quality protein
when matched for leucine content (67). Therefore, the leucine content of the
protein, and possibly the speed of leucine delivery, appears to be the
determining factor for acute changes in maximal stimulation of muscle protein
synthesis. A protein dose that contains 2 to 3 grams of leucine or 0.05 grams of
leucine per kilogram body weight will effectively stimulate muscle protein
synthesis in younger adults (96, 102, 136).
In addition to the acute increase in muscle protein synthesis, consistently
supplementing with protein after resistance training led to small to moderate
increases in muscle hypertrophy over time compared to conditions in which
subjects were not given protein supplements (27, 122). Only one study to date
has directly examined the relationship between acute measures of muscle
protein synthesis and hypertrophy due to resistance training. In this study 23
young men who were recreationally active but had not participated in a
resistance training exercise program in at least a year were tested for initial
strength and resting and postexercise rates of muscle protein synthesis. Then
they participated in a 16-week linear resistance training program consisting of
two days of lower body (e.g., leg press, leg extension, leg curl, and calf press)
and two days of upper body (e.g., chest press, shoulder press, seated row, lat
635
