or multiday events as well as those of a lesser training status
undertake longer protocols to ensure appropriate levels of heat
adaptation (107).
The frequency of heat exposure is important because adaptations
occur more rapidly with days of consecutive exposure; however, if
over a 10- to 14-day protocol, one to three days of heat exposure
are missed, it is unlikely that these missed days will significantly
affect heat acclimation adaptations (107). It is important to note
that twice-daily heat exposure is no more effective than once-daily
for physiological, perceptual, or performance adaptations (141). For
a heat acclimation protocol to be effective, an increase in core and
skin temperatures and sweat rate is required (101, 108). To achieve
this, it is generally recommended that athletes aim for 60 minutes of
heat exposure (108) and a maximum of 90 minutes, although 120
minutes has been shown to be effective (115, 144). It should be
noted that it may take time to build up to these exposure times over
the heat acclimation protocol period as determined by the intensity
of the training sessions as well as the athlete’s heat tolerance.
Measures of training intensity such as heart rate and performance
times may be misleading in the short term until the athlete heat
acclimatizes (54). A more appropriate alternative may be a scalar
method such as perceived exertion (54). However, markers that an
athlete is positively adapting are a lower heart rate and core
temperature for a given workload, increased sweat rate, and
enhanced aerobic exercise capacity (115).
Athletes with higher levels of aerobic fitness may acquire heat
adaptations more rapidly and retain them longer than those athletes
with a lower level of aerobic fitness (101). More aerobically fit
athletes can also tolerate higher core body temperatures and
therefore can perform better in the heat (101, 121). Due to the
variability in responses, it is important that all athletes are monitored
throughout an acclimation protocol, especially those who are just
starting. Similarly, due to the added risk that hot environments can
pose for athletes during training, several safety precautions should
1560
