the success of the facility both in the near term and in the future.
The operational plan should also include staff development and a
plan for the hiring process.
Hiring an architect is the final step of the predesign phase.
Selecting an architect is crucial for meeting administration and
department goals. It is important to select from a list of architects
who have a positive reputation based on previous work. If possible,
it is best to choose an architect who has had previous experience in
the strength and conditioning industry. The architect will likely be
hired through a bid process, meaning that the architect who is hired
is often the one who submits the lowest price. Bid plans require
efficient use of resources so that the money is spent on what is most
useful for the users of the facility.
Design Phase
The design phase is the second phase in the process of building a
new facility. In the design phase, ideas from the committee come
together with regard to the structure and design elements of the
facility. It is extremely important to plan around the flow of the
facility while adhering to all relevant regulations and codes. Federal,
state, and city codes are often highly specific about aspects of the
design. City planning departments can provide the local guidelines
and applicable codes for constructing a facility.
The first step in the design phase is finalizing the design
committee. To reiterate, the committee should include strength and
conditioning and other athletic department professionals with
experience in facility planning and design. This is also the phase
when the designers need to work closely with the architect to
produce a blueprint of the facility.
The blueprint and design need to consider the equipment
specifications. This will help with the flow of the facility and will
influence how effectively people can move from one area of the
facility to another once it is operational. Traffic flow is one of the
most important aspects of designing the facility. Creating easy
1731
