Mirrors should be placed at least 6 inches (15 cm) away from any
equipment (e.g., behind a rack of dumbbells) and a minimum of 20
inches (51 cm) above the floor (4). The purpose of the height
guideline is to ensure that weights do not roll, bounce, or slide into
the bottom of the mirror and cause the glass to break. The standard
weight plate is 18 inches (46 cm) in diameter, giving mirrors a 2-inch
(5 cm) clearance if the plate is dropped near the mirror or leaned
against the wall behind the mirror (14).
Bumper railings or padding may be useful for places that require
added protection from damage, such as walls and mirrors. Railings
are also used in dance and yoga studios so people can hold on for
balance when necessary. Balance railings should be installed
securely with safety in mind and checked regularly before any
weight-bearing activity. The choice of material and beam structure
used for constructing walls (e.g., drywall or cinder block) should be
considered for properly securing balance railings and other wall
attachments. Also, strength and conditioning professionals who plan
to program medicine ball throws into a wall should make sure to use
a solid wall, such as cinder block, to prevent damage.
Hydration and Nutrition Spaces in the
Weight Room
Drinking fountains and water bottle refill stations are important
additions to a strength and conditioning facility. They should be
located away from the training area and should not interrupt traffic
flow. Water stations and nutrition areas are often placed next to the
entrance of the facility or next to the bathrooms and lockers. With
the increased emphasis on nutrition and recovery for athletes,
nutrition areas that include food preparation and appliances, such as
blenders, knives, cutting boards, and refrigeration, are subject to
safe food handling requirements. In the United States, such
requirements 
are 
governed 
by 
the 
U.S. 
Food 
and 
Drug
Administration (22), U.S. Department of Agriculture (22), and U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (19), all of which
1748
