prospective cohort study has examined the link between vaping and
long-term adverse respiratory outcomes. This is further complicated
by the large spectrum of vaping options including various flavors,
additives, and nicotine concentrations. However, in vaping products
that contain nicotine (over 99% of products), the nicotine-stimulated
catecholamine release can activate receptors in the heart and result
in an increased heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac contractility
and workload and, in the long term, can result in changes in
cardiovascular physiology and the development of heart failure and
other associated chronic health issues (133).
Studies examining short-term side effects of vaping report
inflammation and cellular damage in the lungs, leading to decreased
lung capacity and impaired gas exchange (22, 151), which may in
turn affect performance and recovery times during exercise.
However, whether these changes are maintained over the long term
and after vaping cessation is still yet to be established. Studies also
demonstrate that both acute and subacute vaping can exacerbate
both asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and induce
physiological changes in the airways and immune system (159),
which can negatively affect performance and recovery in athletes.
Very few studies have examined the effect of vaping directly on
aerobic endurance exercise. In young, healthy adults, regular vaping
use significantly reduced cardiorespiratory fitness, measured by
V̇ O2peak when compared to nonvapers of the same demographic
(142a). The young adults also demonstrated lower chronotropic
responses and reduced O2 extraction and use during exercises
compared to nonusers. In addition, significantly slower 2-mile (3.1
km) run times have been reported in vape users compared to
nonvapers, with times also being slower compared to traditional
cigarette smokers (30). Additionally, vaping can cause short-term
increases in heart rate and diastolic blood pressure primarily by the
systemic release of catecholamines (144).
376
