Outdoor Training Spaces
Weight room adjacent or satellite outdoor training spaces have
become more common in geographically moderate climates. In
addition, the global COVID-19 pandemic created increased
awareness among strength and conditioning professionals for the
benefit of social distancing, including the use of open-air outdoor
training spaces for enhanced ventilation (15). There are also
scenarios when scheduling or programming can be improved by
having strength and conditioning equipment available near sport or
practice facilities that do not have a dedicated weight room space.
While environmental factors, like weather, must always be
considered for athlete safety, this section provides recommendations
for the safe use of strength and conditioning equipment in outdoor
training areas.
Outdoor training spaces may include multipurpose training lockers
or pods and be located next to a game or practice field (e.g., grass
or artificial turf) or in proximity to the weight room (e.g., via garage
door access). Outdoor training spaces may be for seasonal or year-
round use depending on climate. Important considerations include
ensuring adequate space for strength and conditioning activity to be
performed safely and that standards for equipment, safety spacing,
and walkways are clear. Outdoor training surfaces must offer proper
traction for athletic activity and should not be wet or damp from
recent storms. Ground surface temperatures should also be
considered to avoid injury due to excessive heat or burns (e.g.,
artificial turf may have higher temperatures than surrounding
surfaces). Additional considerations should be placed on ensuring
appropriate athletic footwear and attire for strength and conditioning
sessions held outdoors.
Similar to indoor training spaces, outdoor training spaces should
have a posted emergency action plan that is understood by staff and
athletes. If training equipment is to be transported outside daily for
use, it is advisable for the coaching staff to make this task more
1736
