Alternatively, increased hypertrophy may be beneficial for force production, as
well as for collision and contact-based sports (e.g., American football or rugby)
as a protective mechanism against impacts, and to increase the athletes’
momentum (momentum = mass × velocity) to improve outcomes in collisions.
For example, if any reduction in speed is disproportionately lower than the
increase in muscle mass, the collision sport athlete will be able to generate
greater momentum, likely making him or her more difficult to stop or tackle. In
contrast, excessive hypertrophy may negatively affect the performance of
endurance-based athletes due to the requirement to carry extra mass for longer
durations (13). Despite being in the same sport (i.e., athletics) as a shot-put
thrower, a distance athlete requires a substantial amount of cardiovascular and
muscle endurance within his or her events while also being prone to different
overuse injuries (e.g., stress fractures).
Moreover, the amount of hypertrophy may be limited when considering
weight-categorized sports such as weightlifting, powerlifting, and combat sports.
Depending on the athlete’s body composition and body mass, there may only be
a limited potential for increases in lean body mass to ensure he or she does not
exceed the weight category.
Assessment of the Athlete
The second task is to profile the athlete’s needs and goals by evaluating
training (and injury) status, conducting a variety of tests (e.g., maximum
strength testing), evaluating the results, and determining the primary goal of
training. The more individualized the assessment process, the more specific the
resistance training program for each athlete can be.
Training Status
An athlete’s current condition or level of preparedness to begin a new or revised
program (training status) is an important consideration in the design of
training programs. This includes an evaluation by a sports medicine professional
of any current or previous injuries that may affect training. Also important is the
athlete’s training background or exercise history (training that occurred
before he or she began a new or revised program), because this information will
help the strength and conditioning professional better understand the athlete’s
training capabilities. Readers are referred to McKay and colleagues (108) for
classification of different levels of athlete performance. An assessment of the
athlete’s training background should examine the
type of training program (sprint, plyometric, resistance, and so on),
length of recent regular participation in previous training programs,
level of intensity involved in previous training programs, and
1196
