Combining Training Modalities
Some suggest that aerobic endurance training should be added to
the training of anaerobic athletes to enhance recovery, because it is
postulated that recovery relies primarily on aerobic mechanisms. In
contrast, it is postulated that anaerobic resistance training should be
added to aerobic endurance training because it can aid in preventing
soft tissue injuries. However, when considering the metabolic
specificity of training, thought should be given to whether the
practitioner is programming combination training, cross-training, or
concurrent training. These are related but distinctly different
concepts when seeking to achieve metabolic specific training
adaptations. Broadly, combination training refers to any training
program that includes a mix of different types of exercises or
activities. It does not necessarily imply a specific structure or timing,
just that various exercise modalities are combined to achieve overall
fitness improvements. For example, an 800-meter runner may
include sessions of long, slow distance aerobic work alongside more
event-specific distances and efforts. In contrast, cross-training
deliberately involves incorporating different types of exercise with
the same underlying metabolic adaptation profile (i.e., enhancing
aerobic capacity), without overstressing the primary activity muscles
(e.g., including rowing in a program for a runner), often with the aim
of complementing the main sport performance. In comparison,
concurrent training refers to the simultaneous training of both
anaerobic resistance training and aerobic endurance training at
multiple times within the same period, often within the same training
session or day. In fact, several studies have demonstrated that
recovery in anaerobic power output is related to endurance fitness
(14, 15, 74). Bogdanis and colleagues (14) reported positive
relationships in power recovery in the first 10 seconds of a cycling
sprint, the resynthesis of PCr, and endurance fitness (V̇ O2max).
However, aerobic endurance training may reduce anaerobic
performance capabilities, particularly for high-strength, high-power
performance (82). This reduction in high-strength, high-power
220
