Mode
The mode of plyometric training is determined by the body region
performing the given exercise. For example, a single-leg hop is a
lower body rebounding plyometric exercise, while a two-hand
kneeling medicine ball throw is an upper body exercise that is
performed ballistically. Modes of plyometric exercise are discussed in
the paragraphs that follow.
Lower Body Plyometrics
Lower body plyometrics are appropriate for virtually any athlete and
any sport or rehabilitation context. Because most sports require
athletes to produce a maximal amount of muscular force in a short
amount of time, lower body plyometrics provide an ideal and highly
variable training stimulus that positively transfers training benefits to
a variety of sports. For example, sprinters require sagittal plane
movements, whereas most other sports require combinations of
sagittal plane, frontal plane, and occasional transverse plane
movements to be successful in competition. Demand can differ
within positions in each sport: A middle blocker in volleyball may
require predominantly lateral and vertical movements, whereas an
outside hitter may have an increased emphasis on horizontal into
vertical movements. American football, baseball, soccer, and
basketball athletes must make quick, powerful movements and
changes of direction in all planes to compete successfully. A
basketball center is an example of an athlete who would benefit
greatly from a plyometric training program, because the center is
required to jump repeatedly for rebounds. To be successful, the
center must be able to out-jump the opposing center in order to
rebound more loose balls. Conversely, center backs in soccer may
benefit from more ballistic actions, because they will typically
accelerate into a jump from a running start into a single-foot takeoff.
Lower body plyometric training also gives the ability to produce
more force in a shorter amount of time, thereby allowing a higher
jump. This should also guide the strength and conditioning
1270
