repetitions (e.g., 5RM or 10RM) (139). However, strength and
conditioning professionals should recognize that such approaches
might place the child at heightened risk of injury due to the
cumulative fatiguing effects of multiple repetitions on technical form.
In order to obtain a surrogate measure of muscular strength without
the use of repetition maximum schemes, practitioners could use
field-based measures of different jump protocols (e.g., vertical jump
or long jump) or handgrip strength, measures that have been
significantly correlated to 1RM values in youth (29, 157). Irrespective
of the strength testing protocol used, the child or adolescent must
be able to demonstrate and maintain correct technical competency
throughout the entire test under the watchful eye of a qualified
professional.
Advanced multijoint exercises such as the snatch and clean and
jerk can be incorporated into a child’s program at the appropriate
time (i.e., after foundational strength and technique progressions
have been completed), but the primary focus, especially early in a
resistance training program, should be on developing motor skill
competency and muscle strength (168, 194). The athletic motor
skill competencies (AMSC) have been proposed to represent the
foundational movements that underpin all athletic movements
(figure 7.4; 194). To develop well-rounded athleticism in youth,
practitioners are encouraged to design programs that increase both
form (i.e., technical competency) and function (i.e., force-producing
capabilities) in each of the AMSC. Practitioners do not necessarily
need to expose youth to all of the AMSC in each session, but they
should be targeted at various points throughout the training program
(194).
Poor technique can put abnormal stress on musculoskeletal
tissues and lead to injury. The resistance must be lowered if proper
exercise technique cannot be maintained. When learning new
exercises, children should start with an unloaded barbell, a long
wooden stick, or PVC piping to learn the correct technique. The
importance of correct feedback, delivered at the correct time and in
415
