immediately after finishing their event and at regular intervals thereafter to
quickly replenish glycogen stores.
Because prolonged aerobic endurance exercise breaks down muscle tissue,
protein should be included in the aerobic endurance athlete’s posttraining meal
to help start muscle building and repair, which may attenuate posttraining and
postevent muscle soreness (85). Consuming protein after training has another
benefit: It increases the rate of glycogen storage if carbohydrate intake is less
than 1.2 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight per hour (61). In a
randomized, controlled trial, 18 elite orienteers participated in 13 exercise
sessions during one week. Half of the orienteers (the PRO-CON group) ingested
a protein drink before (0.3 g per kilogram body weight) and a protein-
carbohydrate drink (0.3 g protein per kilogram body weight + 1 g carbohydrate
per kilogram body weight) after training. The other half of participants consumed
an isocaloric carbohydrate-only beverage before and after exercise (CHO). Diet
was 
kept 
consistent 
throughout 
the 
study 
(15%/63%/22%
protein/carbohydrate/fat) except for the addition of the supplements. The basic
diet plus supplements provided 3 grams of protein per kilogram body weight per
day and 8.3 to 9.3 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight per day in
the PRO-CON group; the CHO group consumed 1.8 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day and 8.8 to 10.8 grams carbohydrate per kilogram
body weight per day. A 4-kilometer (2.5 miles) run test was performed at the
beginning and end of the study and 2 hours after participants consumed a
standardized breakfast. PRO-CON significantly improved performance and
reduced markers of muscle breakdown, while CHO did not improve performance.
However, it is not clear from this study if the timing of protein made the
difference or the increased total daily intake of protein in the PRO-CON as
compared to the CHO group (48).
Other research does suggest that protein is important after aerobic endurance
exercise. For instance, a single-blind, randomized, triple-crossover design was
used to assess how different doses of a protein–leucine blend affected
myofibrillar protein fractional synthetic rate (FSR; muscle protein synthesis) in 12
aerobic endurance-trained men after 100 minutes of high-intensity cycling
(performed 3 hours after a standardized breakfast; diet the day before the test
was standardized based on calorie needs and provided the same percentage of
carbohydrate, protein, and fat for each subject). Cyclists consumed 70 g/15
g/180 g/30 g protein/leucine/ carbohydrate/fat, or 23 g/5 g/180 g/30 g, or 0 g/0
g/274 g/ 30 g (control) in four servings during the first 90 minutes of a 240-
minute (4-hour) recovery period. The lower-protein, lower-leucine supplement
(23 g/5 g/180 g/30 g) increased FSR by 33% ± 12% compared to the control
group, while additional protein and leucine (70 g/15 g/180 g/30 g) increased FSR
632
