training. Often coaches are anxious to prevent injury, and overcoaching can disrupt
the self-exploration process. By overcoaching, the athlete cannot self-correct, an
important part of autonomous learning. Cues can be internal (“breathe,” “eyes up,”
“back straight,” “heels on the floor”) and external (“push through the floor,” “try to
pull down on the bar as you come up from the squat,” “make a letter C with your
elbows as you rack the bar in the power clean”).
By focusing attention, coaches describe the mental intensity and effort needed
for the specific technique. For example, lifting coach Gayle Hatch uses cues to
teach stiff arms and trapezius contractions during the initial pull phase of the clean
movement by saying, “When the elbows bend, the power ends” (G. Hatch,
personal communication. March 15, 2007). Likewise, the cues for procedural
movements and speed for the jerk movement can include “Dip and drive.” These
represent technique and motivational cues. In the first instance, the instructions
use external cues to enhance the lifting technique. In the second example, the
coach uses motivational words to represent speed and intensity. Research has
suggested that early in learning, external cues can be very effective. As the
movements become refined and minor technique corrections are needed, internal
cues may be more appropriate (76).
If part practice is to be used, a task can be separated into
subcomponents in numerous ways. Segmentation breaks down the
task into a series of subcomponents that have clear breaks between
them (66). For example, as mentioned previously, the snatch can be
broken down into the first pull, the transition, the second pull, and
the catch. Fractionalization breaks the tasks into subcomponents
that occur simultaneously (66). In performing the push press, the
athlete practices the press motion of the arms and the push motion
of the legs independently. Simplification adjusts the difficulty of
the tasks by changing task characteristics such as the execution
speed or the equipment used (66). In the snatch, the athlete first
practices the subcomponents with a PVC pipe (or similar dowel rod).
In this instance, both segmentation and fractionalization are used.
When teaching the subcomponents of the task, multiple methods
can be used to integrate the parts back into the whole skill. Pure-
part training (also known as the part–whole method) has the
athlete practice each subcomponent of the skill multiple times
independently. After all components have been practiced, the skill is
practiced in its entirety (66). In a snatch, the first pull is practiced,
525
