and they are limited only by their physical capacity to perform this
activity (e.g., a route, play, or predetermined pattern). The physical
capacity 
to 
change 
direction 
while 
decelerating 
and 
then
reaccelerating, sometimes using a different mode of travel, is
change-of-direction (COD) ability, whereas agility requires the
use of perceptual-cognitive ability in combination with change-of-
direction ability. This highlights the similar and contrasting qualities
of speed, change of direction, and agility. For example,
acceleration is a part of change-of-direction ability and agility, but
additional aspects such as deceleration ability and mode of
movement differentiate the training for speed from the training for
change of direction and agility. The physical capacity to change
direction may be a component of agility (i.e., action capacity), but
the perceptual-cognitive component influences the physical demands
of agility. Therefore, while reading this chapter, one should
understand that although these qualities overlap some, differing
physical, technical, or perceptual-cognitive development is required
to improve each of these aspects of physical performance.
When athletes are sprinting or changing direction, their
performance is a function of physical capacity and technical
proficiency. While biomechanical and metabolic efficiency underpin
performance in aerobic sport, effective application of force (net
impulse) limits speed, change of direction, and agility. Simply put, an
athlete’s success in these explosive movements is the product of an
athlete’s strength capacity combined with the ability to use this
strength within the constraints of the activity. Strength is often
associated with an athlete’s capacity to produce force, but it is
important to understand that while high levels of maximal strength
are desirable attributes in sport, sprint, COD, and agility events occur
in periods that prevent athletes from producing and expressing their
maximal strength, thus the rate at which net forces are produced is
essential.
Within sprinting, the application of force allows the athlete to
accelerate, attain high velocities, and attempt to maintain the high
1400
