limb using fast stretch reflexes to better prepare the limb for ground
contact. Cocontraction is a motor control strategy that dynamically
stabilizes the joint; however, due to the simultaneous activation of
both the agonist and antagonist muscle groups crossing the same
joint, net joint moments and agonistic force outputs are reduced
(236). Research shows that seniors rely on increased levels of
muscle cocontraction as a compensatory mechanism to offset their
increased balance difficulties and to minimize postural sway (171).
Research also highlights that reduced mechanical power output
when walking (especially during the push-off phase) of is one of the
biomechanical aging features of gait (45). Intuitively, this literature
would suggest that older adults should use a variety of training
modes specifically designed to offset these natural reductions in
neuromuscular function. Such methods include low-intensity
plyometrics, strength training, balance and dynamic stabilization
exercises, and proprioception training to develop the ability to react
more efficiently with the ground (92, 95, 189).
Physical activity interventions can be effective in improving
neuromuscular function and preventing falls in seniors (95, 112,
222). However, simply increasing physical activity will not prevent
falls on its own. Rather, seniors must engage with, and adhere to,
multidimensional, periodized programs that incorporate elements of
both resistance and balance training (76, 112, 222). Furthermore,
current guidelines suggest that as with any population, training
programs for seniors should overload progressively to promote a
challenging training environment, and that training should be
completed on a frequent basis to provide individuals with a sufficient
training dosage (76). Of note, resistance training as a stand-alone
training method does not seem to prevent the risk of falls (211), and
balance and flexibility training must accompany resistance training in
order to provide the requisite training stimulus to reduce fall risk.
Aerobic exercise should also be featured in a well-balanced
exercise program for older adults, because data indicate that
concurrent strength and aerobic endurance training can be delivered
422
