orange, an apple, and a pear provides a broader array of essential
nutrients than is provided by three apples. A diet providing a variety
of foods from each group is more likely to meet a person’s
macronutrient (carbohydrate, protein, and fat) as well as
micronutrient (vitamins and minerals) needs.
The resources section of the MyPlate website offers several tools
to help plan a healthy diet. MyPlate Plan gives food group targets of
what and how much to eat within a person’s calorie allowance based
on age, sex, height, weight, and physical activity level. It also comes
as an app, MyPlate App, to help build healthy habits, pick daily food
goals, and set real-time progress. Further, there is the Shop Simple
with MyPlate Tool that can be used to find cost-saving food-
purchasing methods and new ways to prepare budget-friendly foods.
Dietary Reference Intakes
Because athletes eat food, not individual nutrients, dietary
recommendations should be presented in terms of specific food
choices. However, it is also important to have an understanding of
the athlete’s nutrient requirements in order to make food
recommendations. The Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs),
developed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and of
Health and Human Services (HHS), are a complete set of nutrient
intakes for use when evaluating and planning diets for healthy
individuals. The DRIs are listed for the macronutrients as well as
micronutrients, electrolytes, and water (71-75, 109, 118, 164). The
DRIs are based on the body of literature regarding nutrient intake
and the reduction of chronic disease, as opposed to simply
prevention of dietary deficiencies (115). Because nutrient intake can
vary considerably from day to day, the DRIs apply to a person’s
usual intake. Therefore, when a sports dietitian assesses a person’s
nutrient intake, they look at several days in order to get an average
daily intake for each nutrient. This is especially true with regard to
evaluating intake of nutrients found in few foods or in very small
amounts in foods (115). Fewer days’ worth of food records are
545
