Undulating Versus Linear Periodization Models
For better or worse, contemporary periodization literature has adopted the terms
linear and nonlinear when referring to periodization models. However, it should be
noted that a central tenet of periodization is the removal of linearity from training
(35, 38, 45, 51, 65, 72, 88). In fact, when developing his original model of
periodization Matveyev used Yakovlev’s concept of supercompensation (104, 105)
as the basis for the need for training to be applied in a nonlinear and rhythmic
manner (59, 103). Matveyev (65) noted that removing linearity from the training
process and implementing appropriate training load variations provides a superior
method of training.
Often the traditional resistance training model is falsely referred to as linear
due to the gradual and progressive mesocycle increases in intensity over time (7,
51, 77). However, a closer look at the traditional model as described by Stone,
O’Bryant, and Garhammer (89, 91) and within the literature (51) shows that the
traditional model contains nonlinear variation in training intensity and volume-load
at the microcycle level and throughout the mesocycle. Regardless of this, the
nonlinear periodization model has been introduced in the strength and
conditioning industry (2, 58, 79). Alternatively, this model is sometimes described
as an undulating or daily undulating periodization model because it involves
larger daily (i.e., within the microcycle) fluctuations in the load and volume (e.g.,
repetitions and volume-load) of the assigned core resistance training exercise. For
example, when using this programming strategy one might perform 4 sets with a
6RM load (strength focus) on the first day of the week (e.g., Tuesday), 3 sets with
a 10RM (hypertrophic focus) on the next training day (e.g., Thursday), and 5 sets
with a 3RM load (power focus) on the last training day (e.g., Saturday). In this
case the load, volume (e.g., repetitions and volume-load), and training focus are
all modified within the microcycle. These modifications are in contrast to what
occurs with the traditional periodization model, falsely referred to as the
linear periodization model, according to which the athlete performs the same
number of sets and repetitions across the training days and varies the training
load. For example, the athlete may perform 4 sets of 6 at 85% of the 1RM on the
first day of training, at 75% of the 1RM on the second day, and at 65% of the
1RM on the third day to basically train using a heavy-to-light training structure
and introduce variation to the training stimulus. While the traditional model
appears to vary only intensity because the repetitions do not change, one must
remember that the volume-load changes in this model result in undulations in
workload and training volume, supporting the idea that the traditional model is in
fact nonlinear and should not be classified as linear (51, 88).
1604
