types of speed training (59). This ensures the athlete is not only
more aerobically efficient and has muscular endurance but also has
race speed capabilities. It is also worth noting that extensive
endurance sessions provide athletes with mental strength and
stamina by experiencing extended periods of time exercising, which
they will encounter on race day.
Pace/Tempo Training
Pace/tempo training employs an intensity at or slightly higher
than 
race 
competition 
intensity. 
The 
intensity 
corresponds
approximately to the maximal lactate steady state; therefore, this
type of training is also often called threshold training or aerobic–
anaerobic interval training (98). There are two ways to conduct
pace/tempo 
training: 
steady 
and 
intermittent 
(98). 
Steady
pace/tempo training is continuous training conducted at an intensity
equal to the maximal lactate steady state for durations of
approximately 20 to 30 minutes. The purpose of pace/tempo training
is to stress the athlete at a specific intensity and improve energy
production from both oxidative and nonoxidative metabolism.
Intermittent pace/tempo training is also referred to as tempo
intervals, cruise intervals, or threshold training (98). During
intermittent pace/tempo training, the intensity is the same as for a
steady-threshold workout, but the training session consists of a
series of shorter intervals with brief recovery periods between work
intervals. During pace/tempo training, it is important to avoid
exercising at a higher intensity than the prescribed pace, assuming
the prescribed pace is an accurate reflection of maximal lactate
steady state. If the workout seems relatively easy, it is better to
increase the distance than to increase the intensity. The primary
objective for this type of training is to develop a sense of race pace
and enhance the body systems’ ability to sustain exercise at that
pace. Pace/tempo training involves the same pattern of muscle fiber
recruitment as is required in competition. The benefits derived from
1539
