Step 2: Exercise Selection
Exercise selection involves choosing exercises for a resistance training
program. To make informed exercise selections, the strength and conditioning
professional must understand the nature of various types of resistance training
exercises, the movement and muscular requirements of the sport, the athlete’s
exercise technique experience, the equipment available, and the amount of
training time available. Figure 18.2 on page 528 displays exercise selection flow
charts for lower body strength and power exercises.
Exercise Type
Although there are hundreds of resistance training exercises to select from when
one is designing a program, most involve primary muscle groups or body areas
and fall into categories based on their relative importance to the athlete’s sport.
Core and Assistance Exercises
Exercises can be classified as either core or assistance based on the size of the
muscle areas involved and their level of contribution to a particular sport
movement. Core exercises recruit one or more large muscle areas (i.e., chest,
shoulder, back, hip, or thigh), involve two or more primary joints (multijoint
exercises; e.g., split squat, bench press, bent-over row), and receive priority
when one is selecting exercises because of their direct application to the sport
and enhanced dynamic correspondence (i.e., transference of gym-based training
to improved performance in athletic tasks). Assistance exercises usually
recruit smaller muscle areas (i.e., upper arm, abdominal muscles, calf, neck,
forearm, lower back, or anterior lower leg), involve only one primary joint
(single-joint exercises; e.g., knee extension and flexion, biceps curls), and
are considered less important for improving sport performance. Generally, all the
joints at the shoulder—the glenohumeral and shoulder girdle articulations—are
considered one primary joint when resistance training exercises are categorized
as core or assistance. The spine is similarly considered a single primary joint
(e.g., abdominal crunch and back extension exercises).
Application of the Needs Analysis
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528 for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
The information in this table reflects one approach to evaluating the requirements of a sport and profiling
an athlete.
1203
