nutrition is crucial in recovery from injury, a nutritionist or a
registered dietitian with a background in sport nutrition may provide
guidelines regarding proper food choices to optimize tissue recovery.
Ideally, the nutritionist has been formally trained in food and
nutrition sciences and may be a registered dietitian (RD) recognized
by the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Commission on Dietetic
Registration (15). A licensed counselor, psychologist, or
psychiatrist with a background in sport may provide strategies that
help the injured athlete better cope with the mental stress
accompanying an injury.
Communication
Communication between members of the allied health team is
essential (15, 97). Most often the injured athlete has the most
contact with coaches, the athletic trainer, and the strength and
conditioning professional. In some instances, athletes disclose the
initial onset of an injury to a sport coach or strength and
conditioning professional before consulting with the athletic trainer.
Thus consistent communication between these individuals is
imperative. This does not negate communication with other
members of the allied health team (physician, physical therapist,
nutritionist, sport psychologist) who may not have as frequent
interactions over the course of a week. A weekly meeting of the
allied health team can provide a forum so all members are able to
discuss the training requirements and necessary restrictions for each
injured athlete. Relevant questions for discussion could include the
following: What is the current status of the athlete (no participation,
limited participation, full participation)? What exercises or activities is
the 
athlete 
currently 
performing? 
Are 
any 
restrictions 
or
modifications necessary? How is the athlete progressing? Do any
program changes need to be made?
To develop training programs most effectively for an injured
athlete, the strength and conditioning professional must understand
the diagnosis of the given injury and exercise indications and
1635
