approximately 15 milligrams per day; athletes have reported using
up to 300 milligrams per day (77). This orally active drug has not
been available for medical use in the United States for several
decades but is still available through black market sources.
Testosterone enanthate is a testosterone ester and is an injectable
steroid that is readily available in the United States and is used
clinically for some rare diseases and for replacement treatment. A
replacement dose is approximately 75 to 100 milligrams per week
administered every one to two weeks. Injectable steroids are
administered intramuscularly, typically by deep gluteal injections.
They are also more potent than oral steroids because of their route
of delivery and perhaps also because they do not require additional
modification to protect them from immediate metabolism by the
liver. The injectable compounds have a wide range of half-lives.
Among the testosterone esters, testosterone propionate remains in
the circulation for approximately 1.5 days, whereas testosterone
buciclate lasts for three months after a single injection (18).
Who Uses Anabolic Steroids?
It is believed that athletes (particularly strength athletes) whose
goals are to improve athletic performance are the primary users of
anabolic steroids. George J. Mitchell, a former United States senator,
in the famous 2007 “Mitchell Report,” stated that use of androgenic-
anabolic steroids by Major League Baseball players in the United
States was pervasive (41). Before this revelation of anabolic steroid
use in athletes, earlier reports date back to the 1952 and 1956
Olympics, in which there were accounts of systematic use of
androgens by the Soviet weightlifting team (41). State-sponsored
anabolic steroid use in other countries has also been documented. In
the former German Democratic Republic after the fall of the
communist government in 1990, classified documents revealed a
secret state program beginning in 1966 to improve national athletic
performance using androgens (41, 75). In the United States,
widespread use has also been reported in powerlifters (51), National
673
