by 51% ± 12% compared to the control group. Though no significant differences
were noted between the two protein and leucine groups, both fared better than
the placebo group, indicating that protein is important after a long, tough
workout (118). Given different workouts, exercise completed in a fasted or
unfasted state, and different doses of protein (10-96 g) used in other studies,
the precise minimum dose of protein needed to maximize FSR after aerobic
endurance exercise is not clear (21, 57). Additionally, it is not clear if maximizing
FSR in the time period immediately after aerobic endurance exercise will
translate to improved performance over time. And finally, the ideal time period
after aerobic endurance training during which protein should be consumed is not
clear and may depend on whether training was completed in a fasted or
unfasted state as well as on total daily protein intake. However, one study found
that delaying protein intake after aerobic endurance exercise by as little as 3
hours blunts its anabolic effects (77).
High-Intensity Intermittent Sports
Because athletes who participate in intermittent high-intensity sports—such as
basketball, hockey, and soccer—may play more than one game per day,
sometimes with just a few hours in between tournament games, immediate
recovery after a game is imperative for performance in their next game. And
when competing in sports that involve prolonged high-intensity intermittent
activity, such as soccer, American football, field and ice hockey, rugby, and
tennis, athletes may significantly reduce their muscle glycogen stores, leading to
muscular and cognitive fatigue (13). Fully replacing muscle glycogen before a
subsequent bout of exercise or competition may prolong time until fatigue and
improve performance. In a study designed to mimic a soccer game, Nicholas and
colleagues had six males complete the same exercise test separated by 22 hours
on two consecutive days—75 minutes of a prolonged, intermittent, high-intensity
shuttle run test after which they completed as many 20 meter (22 yd) shuttles as
possible (each shuttle alternated between jogging and sprinting). Subjects were
assigned to one of two diets for the 22-hour recovery period: a recovery diet
including 10 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight or an isocaloric
diet with more protein and fat than their normal daily diet. Intermittent running
capacity improved after the higher-carbohydrate diet as compared to the higher-
calorie condition with more protein and fat (94). Also, Balsom and colleagues
found that male study subjects performed significantly more work in both short-
term (<10 min) and prolonged (>30 min) high-intensity intermittent exercise
sessions after consuming a high- versus low-carbohydrate diet for the 48-hour
period before the exercise sessions (13).
633
