Statistical Evaluation of Test Data
Once the proper test or tests have been chosen and administered and the scores collected, the next
step may include any or all of the following: (1) analysis of the data to determine the change in
performance of the individuals or group over the training period (weeks, months, or years); (2)
analysis of the individual or group’s performance relative to that of similar individuals or groups
tested in the past; (3) analysis of the relationship of each athlete’s scores to those of the group;
and (4) comparison of individual scores to local, state, national, or international norms.
An important outcome of repeated performance testing is evaluation of both the improvement of
individual athletes and the overall effectiveness of the physical conditioning program as determined
by changes in test scores (103). A difference score is the difference between an athlete’s score at
the beginning and end of a training period or between any two separate testing times. The
percent change is another measure that can be used. However, evaluating the effectiveness of a
training program merely by degree of improvement has two major limitations. First, athletes who
begin the training period at a higher training status will not improve as much as untrained athletes
who perform poorly at the beginning of training (i.e., the principle of diminishing returns). The
window of adaptation for the various physical capacities is typically greater for less well-trained
athletes as well as measures of aerobic fitness (109). Second, athletes may deliberately fail to give
maximal effort on pretraining tests to inflate their pre- to posttraining improvement scores. It is
important to encourage athletes to give maximal effort on both the pre- and posttraining tests.
Types of Statistics
Statistics is the science of collecting, classifying, analyzing, and interpreting numerical data (27,
145). A working knowledge of statistics is helpful in making sound evaluations of test results.
Within statistics are different branches such as descriptive and inferential. Over the years, scientists
and practitioners in strength and conditioning have made increasing use of magnitude-based
approaches (through calculation of the effect size), which can be more meaningful because they
provide information regarding the magnitude of change that is practically meaningful to the athlete
in a given sport.
Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics summarizes or describes a large group of data. It is used when all the
information about a population is known. For example, if all the members of a team are tested,
statements can be made about the team with the use of descriptive statistics. There are three
categories of numerical measurement in descriptive statistics: central tendency, variability, and
percentile rank. In the sections that follow, these terms are defined, and examples of how to
calculate the values and scores are presented.
Central Tendency Measures of central tendency are values about which the data tend to
cluster. The three most common measures of central tendency (27, 145) are as follows:
Mean—the average of the scores (i.e., the sum of the scores divided by the number of scores).
This is the most commonly used measure of central tendency.
Median—the middlemost score when a set of scores is arranged in order of magnitude. With an
even number of scores, the median is the average of the two middlemost scores. Half a group of
scores falls above the median and half falls below the median. Depending on the distribution of
scores, the median can be a better measure of central tendency than the mean. This is
particularly true when very high or very low scores of one or a few members of the group tested
raise or lower the group mean to the extent that it does not adequately describe the ability of
most group members.
822
