Monitoring Sprint Ability
The longstanding method of assessing an athlete’s speed ability has
typically involved a test of maximal-effort linear sprinting. Much of
the time, the maximal-effort sprint test is carried out over a
distance, such as 40 yards (37 m), that is believed to be relevant to
the athlete’s sport. While time to completion is an effective tool to
evaluate changes in sprint performance, these tests do not fully
address the minute changes regarding an athlete’s progression
toward race or field readiness. In addition, testing error in the form
of hand timing and various start tactics confound the interpretation
of testing results. As a result, strength and conditioning professionals
may consider the adoption of additional monitoring tools as part of
their battery of assessments.
One such method of evaluation comes from the assistance of
high-speed cameras or optical timing systems that use interruptions
of infrared light to capture data from an athlete’s collective foot
strike (15). This technology provides strength and conditioning
professionals with additional insight into the sprint capabilities of the
athlete, such as technique and movement strategies (16).
Additionally, 
technology 
that 
permits 
the 
quantification 
of
instantaneous speed is also advantageous for insights into speed at
specific distances, time to achieve specific speeds, peak speed,
acceleration, and τ (acceleration time constant). Table 20.8 provides
a description of key variables that may be beneficial in the
monitoring of speed development.
TABLE 20.8 Monitoring Speed Development
Measure
Description
Interpretation
Ground
contact time
The total time allotted for a
single stance phase.
In general, decreased ground contact
times coupled with improved sprint
completion times may suggest that an
athlete has improved the ability to
generate high rates of force in a shorter
Note: ETG = electronic timing gate; 2D = two-dimensional; 3D = three-dimensional; LiDAR
= light detection and ranging.
1471
