literature does not provide support for the efficacy of HGH use in
athletic populations, it is likely that the inability to perform such
studies (due to ethical constraints) will limit much of our
understanding of HGH and human performance. In years past, the
use of HGH by athletes may have been prevalent in some
professional sports because of its perceived efficacy and the fact that
it could not be detected in random drug tests. Currently, HGH
cannot be detected in the urine via a drug test, and it may be
postulated that athletes opt to use it for this reason. However, a
blood test for HGH was first introduced at the 2004 Summer Olympic
Games in Athens, Greece.
Growth hormone is a protein molecule. Injection is necessary in
order to avoid its complete metabolism and maintain its
effectiveness. Oral ingestion does not result in any benefit. Many of
the actions of growth hormone are mediated through insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), another peptide hormone, which is
produced and secreted from the liver in response to growth hormone
stimulation. IGF-1 is now being synthesized using recombinant DNA
technology and will likely produce the same effects as HGH.
Adverse Effects
The use of HGH does, however, present some potential significant
health risks. Excessive secretion of growth hormone during
childhood causes gigantism, a condition in which a person becomes
abnormally tall. After puberty, once linear growth has stopped,
excess secretion of growth hormone causes acromegaly, a
disfiguring disease characterized by a widening of the bones,
arthritis, organ enlargement, and metabolic abnormalities. This is a
potential risk for athletes who use HGH as an ergogenic aid.
Additionally, these side effects may provide some indication that the
athlete could be using this drug. In clinical studies in growth
hormone–deficient adults, side effects appear to be minimal for even
up to two years of replacement therapy (1, 209). However, athletes
who supplement with HGH generally use dosages that far exceed the
692
