Speed Development Strategies
The planning process for speed development is similar to that used
by strength and conditioning professionals in the weight room.
Specifically, planning tactics should be periodized in a manner that
addresses the physical and psychological components of sprinting
through emphasis and de-emphasis on particular qualities in a
phasic manner. An athlete’s capability to sprint can be improved
through the incorporation of training periods that are designed to
fully maximize and saturate a fitness quality, which may bolster the
effects of future training agendas.
To enhance speed, a practitioner should consider the relationship
between human locomotion and force production. Throughout this
chapter the authors have pointed to a link between sprint success
and certain physiological phenomena. Elite sprinters produce large
amounts of force within a short amount of time. This high level of
force allows the sprinter to produce longer step lengths at a faster
rate. This display of movement on the track reflects enhanced
neuromuscular factors—namely, maximal strength, RFD, and
impulse. These variables are the product of well-designed training
protocols that aim to enhance qualities such as the hypertrophy of
task-specific motor units, firing frequency, rate coding, and muscle–
tendon stiffness.
An option for speed development is provided in table 20.7,
demonstrating how sequenced phases of training may seamlessly
develop sprint potential through the maturation of accelerative
abilities before the execution of maximal-velocity efforts. This model,
which can be referred to as a short to long method of sprint training,
is a conceptual progression that attempts to merge the relationship
between larger rates of acceleration and greater sprint velocities
(discussed earlier in this chapter) (31). Specifically, an athlete taking
part in a short to long model will begin the training year with an
emphasis on improving propulsive force output through short sprints
that maintain the biomechanics associated with the acceleration
1465
