the water bag version resulted in significantly greater external
oblique, lumbar erector spinae, and gluteus medius activation.
Unilateral carries: Unilateral carries with the load positioned
overhead (e.g., kettlebell or dumbbell) or at the hip via a
kettlebell, dumbbell, or farmer’s handle (suitcase carry)
impose a unique frontal plane challenge to the athlete (87).
These carries may be advanced total body exercises that will
improve lateral trunk flexor muscles (e.g., obliques and
quadratus lumborum) and scapular control, thereby allowing
better lateral stabilization of the spine than more traditional
exercises such as dumbbell side bends or side planks.
Technique Tips for Weighted Carries
Irrespective of where the load is positioned on the body, the athlete should look to
move in a similar way to normal walking. For example, during the carrying
component of the exercise, the athlete should retain a predominantly neutral and
vertical spinal position with no substantial hyperextension, flexion, or lateral spinal
flexion. The athlete should use loads that challenge his or her desired walking
speed, step length, step rate, and ground contact time but are still within his or
her ability to maintain core and total body stability. In order to achieve this, the
athlete will need to concentrate on keeping the loads in the same relative position
to his or her center of mass throughout the carry. To achieve this, the athlete will
need to stiffen the spine in response to the likely perturbations these awkward
loads impose on the system during the walking phase. This may require some
breath holding, which can be challenging due to the high spinal compressive forces
(especially observed in the yoke walk) or if the load is positioned on the chest as in
Zercher, sandbag, and keg carries, because such loads can further restrict typical
respiration patterns.
Kettlebell Training
Recently, strength and conditioning professionals have become
interested in the use of kettlebell exercises (11, 23, 83). While
seemingly a new phenomenon, the use of kettlebells dates back
hundreds of years to when they were a popular training method in
various Eastern Bloc countries (57). The word kettlebell comes from
the Russian word girya, which refers to a cast iron cannonball with a
1128
