suggests that both anaerobic training, including sprinting and
resistance training (16, 106), and aerobic endurance training (64,
65) can increase resting muscle glycogen concentration with
concomitantly appropriate nutrition.
The rate of glycogen depletion is related to exercise intensity
(137). Muscle glycogen is a more important energy source than liver
glycogen during moderate- and high-intensity exercise. Liver
glycogen appears to be more important during low-intensity
exercise, and its contribution to metabolic processes increases with
duration of exercise. Increases in relative exercise intensity of 50%,
75%, and 100% of maximal oxygen uptake result in increases in the
rate of muscle glycogenolysis (the breakdown of glycogen) of 0.7,
1.4, and 3.4 mmol · kg−1 · min−1, respectively (133). At relative
intensities of exercise above 60% of maximal oxygen uptake, muscle
glycogen becomes an increasingly important energy substrate; the
entire glycogen content of some muscle cells can become depleted
during exercise (132).
Relatively constant blood glucose concentrations are maintained
at very low exercise intensities (<50% of maximal oxygen uptake)
because of low muscle glucose uptake. However, as exercise
duration increases beyond 90 minutes, blood glucose concentrations
fall but rarely below 2.8 mmol/L (2). Long-duration exercise (>90
min) at higher intensities (>50% of maximal oxygen uptake) may
result in substantially decreased blood glucose concentrations as a
result of liver glycogen depletion. Hypoglycemic reactions may occur
in some people with exercise-induced blood glucose values less than
2.5 mmol/L (3, 35). Reduced liver carbohydrate stores cause a
decline in blood glucose to approximately 2.5 to 3.0 mmol/L,
resulting in diminished carbohydrate oxidation and eventual
exhaustion (32, 35, 137). However, before exhaustion occurs, it is
important to note that other ATP sources are converted to glucose
through gluconeogenesis, with free fatty acids becoming the
predominant fuel source.
206
