increasing meal frequency, and focusing on choosing calorie-dense foods are all
strategies that can help an athlete gain weight. In addition to increasing total
calorie intake, athletes should ensure that they are eating enough protein to
maximize gains in lean body mass: 1.6 to 2.2 grams per kilogram body weight
per day. Increasing an athlete’s protein intake may make weight gain tough,
given the profound effect that protein has on satiety, as well as the increased
thermic effect of feeding associated with higher-protein diets. However,
overfeeding protein is advantageous if the athlete can sustain the diet. In a
randomized, controlled overfeeding study, 16 healthy adults lived in a metabolic
ward for eight weeks and were overfed a diet containing low (5% of total
calories), normal (15% of total calories), or high (25% of total calories) protein.
The subjects who consumed the normal- and high-protein diet stored
approximately 45% of the excess calories as lean body mass, whereas those on
the low-protein diet stored 95% of the excess calories consumed as body fat
(20). In addition to making dietary changes, athletes who want to gain weight
should consider supplementing with creatine monohydrate, a supplement that
safely and effectively increases lean body weight (73).
TABLE 11.4 Physical Activity Level Values and Activity
Coefficients
Physical activity
level (PAL)*
Examples
Physical activity coefficient
(males/females)
Sedentary (≥1.0 to
<1.4)
Common activities of daily living (ADLs)
1.00/1.00
Low active (≥1.4 to
<1.6)
ADLs and 30-60 min of daily moderate activity
1.11/1.12
Active (≥1.6 to
<1.9)
ADLs and ≥1 h of daily moderate activity
1.25/1.27
Very active (≥1.9 to
<2.5)
ADLs and ≥ 1 h of daily moderate activity and 1
more h of vigorous activity or 2 h of moderate
activity
1.48/1.45
*PAL = ratio of energy expenditure to basal daily energy expenditure (“1.0” means total energy expenditure
equals basal daily energy expenditure).
Reprinted by permission from L.M. Burke and E.S. Rawson, “Fueling and Nutrition,” in NSCA’s Essentials of
Sport Science, edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by D.N. French and L. Torres
Ronda (Human Kinetics, 2022), 366.
Finally, though athletes may know their energy and protein needs, putting this
knowledge into practice can be perplexing. Therefore, regular nutrition
counseling (or coaching) by a sports dietitian or sports nutritionist with an
advanced degree is a recommended strategy for facilitating greater weight gain.
644
