androstenediol, 19-nor-androstenedione, and 19-nor-androstenediol.
There are many other prohormone supplements available that have
not been clinically tested. Also, use of prohormones has not been
studied in highly trained athletes. In addition, oral administration has
been the primary method of taking prohormones. The oral use of
prohormones may not be as effective as other means of intake (e.g.,
injection). All of this suggests that continued study of the efficacy of
the testosterone precursors for performance enhancement is still
needed; specifically warranted is examination of other routes of
ingestion in a trained competitive athletic population.
Selective Androgen Receptor Modulators
and Peptides
Selective androgen receptor modulators (SARMs) are tissue-
selective agonists of androgen receptors in tissues such as muscle
and bone. As a result, SARMs are purported to have similar anabolic
properties as traditional anabolic steroids but with reduced
androgenic effects in other tissues where these effects are undesired
(e.g., liver or prostate). Therefore, there is also hope that SARMs
may produce more limited side effects when compared to anabolic
steroids. The development of novel peptides, or short chains of
amino acids that regulate cellular functions and biochemical
processes, has been an emerging frontier in pharmaceutical
development alongside SARMs and, similar to SARMs, has potential
for selective agonism and thus limited side effects. Due to their
significant clinical potential in diseases or disorders characterized by
muscle wasting, SARMs and various peptides have been and
continue to be tested in preclinical studies and in clinical trials in
various patient populations. However, there are no current FDA-
approved SARMs, and all are currently investigational drugs. All
SARMs are also currently prohibited both in and outside of
competition (i.e., at all times) for all athletes by WADA. Similarly,
hormone (e.g., testosterone, growth hormone, corticotrophin)-
stimulating peptides are prohibited at all times by WADA. Despite
683
