To initiate movement, drive off the back leg by extending the back leg knee
and hip with the center of mass (COM) moving behind center of pressure at
toe-off.
Using a low heel recovery, the front leg moves back behind the rear leg and
makes subsequent ground contact underneath the hips.
Each foot contact should be toe to heel (never heel first).
Keep hips low to increase stability.
Maintain a forward trunk lean.
Keep the head up and looking forward (or toward an opponent).
Involve a relaxed contralateral arm movement to match the timing and
amplitude of the leg movement. The range of motion at the shoulder should
be small.
The hips, knees, and ankles should be aligned in the frontal plane; avoid
planting the foot wider than the hips to help maintain torso and pelvic
position (i.e., hip step-width) and avoid a narrow step width.
Subsequent Steps
With each step, use a low heel recovery to keep the feet close to the ground
(i.e., rapid limb switching with minimal knee separation on ground contact)
to enable a quicker transition to a subsequent movement (e.g., COD or
forward sprint).
Keep the hips low to maintain a low COM again to help quicken the
transition into the subsequent movement (i.e., minimize vertical oscillation).
Possible cues include “stay low” or “drop the hips.”
Each foot contact should be toe to heel. A possible cue is “toe to heel.”
Ensure foot contact is in line with the hips in the frontal plane to avoid feet
crossing and the risk of trips or falls.
Maintain a forward trunk lean.
Keep the head up and looking forward (or toward an opponent). A possible
cue is “eyes up” or “head up.”
Use a relaxed, low-amplitude contralateral arm movement with the objective
to project COM rearward, with minimal vertical projection and oscillation.
Side-Shuffle
Start Position
Get in an athletic ready position: the feet are shoulder-width apart; weight is
distributed toward the balls of the feet; flex the hips, knees, and ankles (i.e.,
strong quarter-squat position); keep the back flat with a torso lean
(shoulders over knees); the head is up and the arms are by the sides with
elbows flexed and hands in front of the body.
1450
