Goal Setting
Not surprisingly, many of the concepts discussed in this chapter can
have a direct influence on one another. Self-efficacy is one of these
in that it has a significant impact on the types of goals people set for
themselves. Those with higher confidence and efficacy generally
envision, create, and strive to accomplish more challenging goals.
Goal setting can be characterized as a process whereby
progressively challenging standards of performance are pursued with
a defined criterion of task performance that increases the likelihood
of perceived success (35). For example, a goal for a swimmer may
be to execute a technically correct stroke throughout a sanctioned
distance, such as the 50-meter freestyle. In the beginning, the
swimmer’s skill level might be so low that such a task would seem
overwhelming and produce a strong sense of failure and frustration,
yet physiological testing may show the coach that the athlete has
the physical resources to excel at such an event (i.e., the swimmer
has a high degree of fast-twitch, or type II, muscle fibers, exhibits
superior muscular power or speed-strength in the upper and lower
body, and seems to have a high capacity for anaerobic metabolism).
However, the stroke mechanics are inefficient; the athlete is highly
aware of this and therefore lacks confidence. First, the coach and
athlete can break the skill and conditioning units down into
manageable components (the traditional whole–part–whole method
of learning). Then as the athlete focuses on and masters each
component, a sense of progress and success is nurtured, developing
more confidence and better motivating the athlete to complete the
challenging goal.
Systematic goal setting can simultaneously increase the
psychological development and performance of the athlete (64). A
number of reasons explain why goal setting affects performance:
Goals direct an athlete’s attention by prioritizing efforts.
Goals increase effort because of the contingency of success on
goal attainment.
499
