Facility Administration
Strength and conditioning facility rules and guidelines are important
for providing guidance on conduct and behavior, establishing order,
and keeping the program on course toward the goal of providing a
safe, clean, and professional training environment. Refer to figure
26.6 for a list of common facility rules and guidelines. These should
be posted in the facility where they can be easily seen.
Understand that the strength and conditioning facility is unique
and that it may have certain characteristics that dictate the specific
application of policies and activities. Equipment available and size of
the facility or team can present a logistical challenge for scheduling
and developing hours of operation. One should consider what
training format will affect the greatest number of athletes when
making scheduling decisions. Particularly for small colleges or high
schools, the goal is to organize the strength and conditioning
program so as to allow the practitioner to work with the maximum
number of athletes based on the equipment and time available while
under a proper supervision ratio. In any case, the priority of a team’s
training time depends on the season they are in. In-season teams
typically have priority over off-season teams, because often the
training schedule revolves around the practice and game schedule.
Off-season teams may have to compromise and train early in the
morning if the facility cannot accommodate multiple teams at a time.
One potential solution is adopting a Monday-Wednesday-Friday
format for off-season teams, which opens the facility to be used by
in-season teams on Tuesday and Thursday. If Friday competitions
interfere with this organization, a second scenario is scheduling
some of the off-season teams on Monday-Tuesday-Thursday and
some on Tuesday-Thursday-Friday. This will allow the facility to be
used by in-season teams on Monday and Wednesday. Consider
scheduling off-season teams during typical afternoon practice times.
In-season teams can be scheduled early or late to reduce
overcrowding in the facility (3).
1810
