increases in irritability and aggressiveness (174). Pope and
colleagues (175) reported significant elevations in aggressiveness
and manic scores following 12 weeks of testosterone cypionate
injections in a controlled double-blind crossover study. Interestingly,
the results of this study were not uniform across the subjects. Most
subjects showed little psychological effect, and few developed
prominent effects. A cause-and-effect relationship has yet to be
identified in anabolic steroid users, but it does appear that
individuals who experience psychological or behavioral changes
recover when steroid use is discontinued (79).
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects associated with anabolic steroid use are listed in
table 12.2. It is important to note that there are differences between
the side effects of anabolic steroid use under medical supervision
and those associated with abuse (i.e., consumption of many drugs at
high doses). Most of the information concerning adverse medical
events associated with anabolic steroid use has been acquired from
athletes self-administering the drugs. In conjunction, some of the
scientific literature has suggested that the medical problems related
to anabolic steroids may be somewhat overstated (23, 225),
considering that many of the side effects linked to abuse are
reversible 
on 
cessation. 
Anecdotally, 
it 
appears 
that 
a
disproportionate magnitude of use and incidence of adverse events
are evident in bodybuilders (who are also known for consuming
several other drugs—such as diuretics, thyroid hormones, insulin,
and anti-estrogens—that relieve some side effects but potentiate
other risk factors as well) compared to strength and power athletes.
Testosterone Precursors (Prohormones)
Prohormones are precursors to the synthesis of other hormones and
are theorized to increase the body’s ability to produce a given
specific hormone. The basis for the use of prohormones as an
ergogenic aid evolved from a study showing a threefold increase in
679
