Tendons and ligaments are composed primarily of tightly packed,
parallel arrangements of collagen bundles. Mature tendons and
ligaments contain relatively few cells. The small number of
metabolically active cells in tendons and ligaments makes the
requirement for oxygen and nutrients in these tissues relatively low.
Ligaments contain elastic fibers (elastin) in addition to collagen,
because a certain amount of stretch is needed within a ligament to
allow normal joint motion. Tendons and ligaments attach to bone
with great strength, allowing the maximal transmission of forces.
The fibrous connective tissues that surround and separate the
different organizational levels within skeletal muscle are referred to
as fascia. Fascia has sheets of fibrocollagenous support tissue,
containing bundles of collagen fibers arranged in different planes, to
provide resistance to forces from different directions. Fascia within
muscles converges near the end of the muscle to form a tendon
through which the force of muscle contraction is transmitted to
bone. Compared with that of muscle tissue, tendon metabolism is
much slower due to poorer vascularity and circulation (82). In fact,
the increase in blood flow to skeletal muscle via exercise is not
paralleled by the same perfusion in tendons (88). This limited
vascularity has implications for regeneration and is the reason
tendons can take significant amounts of time to heal following injury.
The primary stimulus for growth of tendons, ligaments, and fascia
is the insult from mechanical forces created during high-intensity
exercise. The degree of tissue adaptation appears to be proportional
to the intensity of exercise (88). Consistent anaerobic exercise that
exceeds the threshold of strain has a positive effect on stimulating
connective tissue changes (82).
Empirical evidence suggests that connective tissues must increase
their functional capabilities in response to increased muscle strength
and hypertrophy. The sites where connective tissues can increase
strength and load-bearing capacity are
the junctions between the tendon (and ligament) and bone
surface,
318
