its actual weight. A balance scale determines only the object’s mass,
so its weight (Fg) must be calculated using equation 2.8 if a spring or
electronic scale is not available.
Popular terminology for weight and mass is often incorrect and
used interchangeably with correct terminology. As explained earlier,
the correct measurement unit for mass, which describes the load
presented to us by, for example, barbells and dumbbells, is the
kilogram (kg). Therefore, a barbell loaded to 85 kilograms should be
referred to as “the barbell has a mass of 85 kilograms” or “the
barbell is 60 kilograms” without referring to weight. Use of pounds
as a measurement unit of mass is incorrect because it is a
measurement unit once used for force. However, we know that the
correct measurement unit for both weight and force is the newton
and that this describes the interaction of mass and gravity (table 2.1,
page 37). While the weight of the 85-kilogram barbell on planet
Earth is 833.85 newtons, on the moon its weight would be 137.7
newtons, making it feel more like 14 kilograms, even though it did
not physically change.
Applications to Resistance Training
The gravitational force on an object always acts downward. Since,
by definition, the moment arm by which a force produces torque is
perpendicular to the line of action of the force, the moment arm of a
weight is always horizontal. Thus, torque due to an object’s weight is
the product of the weight and the length from the weight to the axis
of rotation (joint). During an exercise, although the weight does not
change, the length between the weight and a given joint axis can
change constantly. When the weight is horizontally closer to the
joint, it exerts less resistive torque; when it is horizontally farther
from a joint, it exerts more resistive torque. For example, in the
biceps curl, the length element is greatest when the forearm is
horizontal. Thus, in that position the athlete must exert the greatest
muscle torque to support the weight. The moment arm decreases as
the forearm rotates either upward or downward away from the
149
