capillary densities, and improved enzyme activity. It may be that
experienced athletes do not experience further increases in their
V̇ O2max through chronic aerobic endurance training but that their
performance improves due to enhanced exercise economy (15, 66).
The intensity of training is one of the most important factors in
improving and maintaining aerobic power. Short, high-intensity bouts
of interval sprints can improve maximal oxygen uptake if the interim
rest period is also short. A repeated sprint-sequence interval
session can generally be defined as at least two short bouts of ≥10
seconds with a short recovery period of ≤60 seconds; however, this
will depend on the athletes’ goals (50). Callister and colleagues (20)
demonstrated that long rest periods used with sprints improve sprint
speed without significant increases in maximal aerobic power.
Therefore, longer training sessions with higher amounts of rest
between exercise bouts result in less improvement in aerobic
capacity. The use of shorter recovery periods between high-intensity
training intervals has been shown in various studies to improve
various skeletal muscle metabolic processes, resulting in improved
aerobic endurance performance (48).
Aerobic endurance training is generally associated with alterations
in body composition, assuming appropriate nutritional intake.
Aerobic endurance training usually decreases the relative percentage
of body fat but has little or no significant effect on fat-free mass.
Longer-term programs can result in greater decreases in the
percentage of body fat (15, 34, 73). Excessive training may lead to a
predominance of catabolic activity in the body and cause an
imbalance between catabolic and anabolic processes (141).
Aerobic endurance training results in reduced body fat,
increased maximal oxygen uptake, increased exercise
economy, increased respiratory capacity, lower blood
lactate 
concentrations 
at 
submaximal 
exercise,
increased mitochondrial and capillary densities, and
improved enzyme activity.
358
