accumulates and the longer the delay before complete recovery and adaption can
occur. As the athlete recovers from and adapts to the training stimuli, fatigue
dissipates, and preparedness and performance increase. If no new training
stimulus is introduced, a state of involution or detraining (i.e., a reduced overall
capacity, to below the current baseline) is observed. In contrast, if a new training
stimulus is introduced, the process is repeated. This basic pattern is present
whenever an athlete is exposed to a training exercise, session, day, or cycle
within a periodized training plan. It should be noted that while recovery is an
important part of the training process, it is not always necessary to reach a state
of complete recovery before engaging in a new bout or session of training (72).
The manipulation of workloads and training intensities through use of light and
heavy sessions or days of training can be used to modulate fatigue and recovery
responses (8, 26, 88) while allowing for fitness to be either increased or
maintained. Conceptually, this theory serves as the foundation for sequential
periodization models in that these models allow for the manipulation of various
training factors to modulate the athlete’s overall fatigue levels, rate of recovery,
and adaptive response to the training stimuli.
FIGURE 22.2 The general adaptation syndrome (GAS) and application to periodization.
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization,” in NSCA’s Guide to Program Design, 2nd ed.,
edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by M.T. Jones (Human Kinetics, 2024), 257. Adapted from A.J. Cunanan, B.H.
DeWeese, J.P. Wagle, et al., “The General Adaptation Syndrome: A Foundation for the Concept of Periodization,” Sports Medicine 48 (2018):
787-797.; R.W. Fry, A.R. Morton, and D. Keast, “Periodisation of Training Stress-A Review,” Canadian Journal of Sports Science 17 (1992):
234-240.; Stone et al. (1982); Stone et al. (2007).
1584
