skill before proceeding) maximizes the benefits of both practice
schedules (32). In the instance of the jumps, the athlete would
perform a few repetitions of the squat depth jump before moving on
to another movement such as the side-to-side push-off.
Variable Practice
Similar to random practice, variable practice includes variations of
the same skill within a single practice session as opposed to specific
practice in which a specific skill (i.e., depth jump to second box of a
specific height) is repeated multiple times. In variable practice, the
athlete would practice stepping from and jumping to boxes of
varying heights. Similar to random practice, variable practice can
impair performance during the practice session but can enhance
performance on a novel variation of a skill (33) such as the ability to
quickly jump to a second box after stepping off a box from an
unpracticed height. A combination of specific and variable practice
allows the athlete to develop sport-specific skills while also providing
the athlete with the flexibility to perform in unfamiliar contexts (33).
This flexibility is important to an athlete’s success, because sport
requires the athlete to perform in unfamiliar environments (travel
games) and to accurately modify a practice skill in response to an
opponent. As an example, training to land from and jump to varying
heights will allow the athlete to respond in a game and execute the
skill in an unfamiliar context.
Observational Learning
Observational practice (action observation), or practice through
observation of the task or skill to be performed, has important
implications for motor skill learning. Observational practice
frequently uses prerecorded videos or live demonstrations. The
individual executing the observed skill can be a novice or a
competent or expert performer. When physical practice is combined
with observational practice, learning is enhanced (52). In a strength
and conditioning setting, partner work can facilitate learning. As one
527
