Jenny has been training to get better at volleyball but on her college team has
good competition. She nervously fidgets with her hands before drills and often
reacts without concerns for form or accuracy. Also, she will storm out of the gym
when her emotions get the best of her. This has been occurring for three months.
She is a dedicated athlete in the strength program. Often she feels less talented
compared to her peers and pushes herself to prove everyone wrong about her
nonscholarship status. At night, she often worries about her choices, her ability,
and her friendships. This has caused her to lose sleep, averaging about three to
four hours a night. She also starts missing workouts due to oversleeping and
performs poorly in coordination drills. When approached about her effort, she gets
defensive and leaves training.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Fidgets and storms out of the gym, missing workouts, oversleeping
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
Three months; it seems to be disrupting other aspects of her life such as social
relationships or sleep
Step 3: Referral Source
Counselor
Case Study 3
Meisha is a 15-year-old softball player who is very outgoing. She is happy but can
be too intense for her teammates. They report her mood as very aggressive and
confrontational. This has been an issue for the last month. Wanting attention,
Meisha often wants to talk about leading drills, wants to be the first in line, and
talks loudly. Her relationships, sleep, and self-care seem good, but lately friends
have started to call her less. She wants to learn more about goal setting and self-
talk so she can get stronger in the off-season. Coaches report several girls on the
team have reported that her mood is creating an issue on the team such that
teammates are starting to feel uncomfortable. Meisha reports feeling socially
isolated and sad about this development.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Loud talking, aggressive, feeling uncomfortable with being socially disengaged
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
One month, socially disruptive, not affecting behavior outside of sports
Step 3: Referral Source
Performance coach or consultant
Case Study 4
Alex is a high school senior who cannot seem to find his position on the soccer
team. His mood keeps getting worse. This has been happening for the last six
512
