intensities, although muscle fiber hypertrophy contributed little to
increased lifting performance (72).
The magnitude of hypertrophy ultimately depends on the training
stimulus and how the acute training variables are prescribed. To
optimize muscle growth, appropriate training periodization is
essential for maximizing the combination of mechanical and
metabolic stimuli. Mechanical factors include the lifting of heavy
loads or low to moderate loads at near-momentary muscular failure,
with or without the inclusion of eccentric muscle actions (159a), and
moderate to high training volumes (95), all of which are
characteristic of typical resistance training prescriptions for muscle
strength and hypertrophy. An increasing amount of evidence also
supports the use of novel training modalities (e.g., occlusion
training) as alternative methods of inducing appropriate mechanical
or metabolic stress. Metabolic factors center on low- to moderate-
intensity or moderately high-intensity training with high volumes and
short rest intervals (characteristic of bodybuilding training) (39,
136). Collectively, mechanical factors result in optimal recruitment of
muscle fibers (because muscle fibers need to be recruited before
growth), growth factor expression, and potential disruption to the
sarcomeres, all of which increase muscle CSA (63). The metabolic
factors stress the glycolytic energy system and result in increased
metabolites that may be involved in muscle growth. These programs
also elicit the most potent anabolic hormone response (96).
Also proposed as a mechanism for increasing muscle size, and
something that has been debated by exercise scientists for years, is
hyperplasia. Hyperplasia is the term given to an increase in the
number of muscle fibers via longitudinal fiber splitting in response to
high-intensity resistance training. Hyperplasia has been shown to
occur in animals (13, 64, 77), but the findings are controversial in
humans, with some studies supporting (108, 111, 114, 165) and
others rejecting its occurrence in humans (110). Part of the reason
for this confusion may arise from cross-sectional studies comparing
resistance-trained athletes to untrained individuals, showing a
302
