performance as well as reducing time-trial heart rate and maximal
heart rate, despite there being no beneficial effect on maximal
oxygen uptake, core or mean skin temperature, plasma volume, or
blood lactate, nor meaningful effects on rating of perceived exertion
or thermal comfort. The differences between studies and whether
improvements were observed with respect to heat acclimation may
be related to the environmental conditions (i.e., warm or hot, dry or
humid), intensity of the exercise used, the acclimation protocols that
the athletes were exposed to, and the initial level of athlete
acclimation, all of which determine the degree of thermoregulatory
and physiological adaptations (124).
Heat acclimation adaptations start to occur quickly once exposed
to the hot environment and continue for the duration of the process.
However, it needs to be noted that heat acclimation adaptations do
not all occur at the same rate, with some occurring more quickly
than others and some (e.g., sweat rate) continuing as the
acclimation period continues (124). The time course of the
physiological adaptations to heat acclimation are outlined in figure
6.3. The physiological changes to the thermoregulatory system start
to occur very quickly, commencing from the first day of exposure
(124) and continuing over subsequent days, with the majority of the
adaptations (~75%) reported to occur within the first four to six
days (121).
Unfortunately, heat acclimation–induced thermoregulatory and
physiological adaptations are transient and relatively short-term, and
after leaving the hot environment the changes start to dissipate after
only a few days or weeks depending on the length of the exposure
(47). While a lot is known about the heat acclimation process,
considerably less is known about the decay rate of the adaptations
(49). Originally, it was proposed that for each day of a heat
acclimation protocol, the adaptation would be retained for two days
(96). However, more recent research indicates that for every day
that passes without exposure to the heat, there is a 2.5% loss of
adaptations (28). The adaptations also decay at different rates and
367
