Type
Description
Throws
Single or both arms projecting a medicine ball or other external weight either
horizontally or vertically. Progressions include increased mass of the implement,
increased target distance, or change of emphasis in complexity of the movement
(e.g., kneeling vs. standing throw).
Slams
Generally, a double-arm movement forcefully bringing a medicine ball or other
implement directly down to the ground. Progressions include increased mass of
the medicine ball or increased target velocity of the medicine ball.
Pull
Ballistically pulling the body in a vertical direction such as an explosive supine
row or a pull-up. The position of the center of mass and range of action will be
determined by the athlete’s strength and movement competence.
Push
Pressing the body away from the ground in a prone position. Progressions need
to consider the athlete’s relative strength levels and include incorporating shock
methodology with varying depth of drop-to-ground contact, decreasing flight
time to increase movement velocity, or increasing complexity through lateral or
overhead movements.
Note: Although these are classified as upper body movements, some throws and slams are
total body in nature. If the upper body is not isolated, many actions are initiated with the
hips, knees, and ankles and a postural force-multiplication enables the object to be
projected from the upper body. This is entirely appropriate if this is a desired objective
within the athlete’s program.
Trunk Plyometrics
In general, it is difficult to perform true plyometric drills that directly
target trunk musculature (table 19.4) because all the requisite
plyometric elements may not be present. As with upper body
plyometric exercises, after the eccentric phase of the SSC there is
likely some storage of elastic energy during a plyometric (so to
speak) trunk drill.
TABLE 19.4 Trunk Plyometric Drills
Type
Description
Lower body
anchored
Either suspended in a prone position or in a traditional sit-up position with
the feet anchored so that the upper body is free to move. Movements can
be progressed by incorporating or increasing an external resistance or
movement velocity.
1273
