The duration of a training session is often influenced by
the exercise intensity; the longer the exercise duration,
the lower the exercise intensity.
Step 5: Exercise Progression
Once athletes begin an aerobic endurance exercise program, they
need to continue training to either maintain or advance their aerobic
fitness level. However, research indicates that aerobic fitness does
not decrease for up to five weeks when frequency decreases to as
few as two times per week as long as training intensity is maintained
(126).
Increasing 
aerobic 
endurance 
fitness 
requires 
program
progression, which initially involves increasing the frequency,
intensity, and duration of exercise. Typically, for the general
population, it is recommended that from week to week within a
longer-term training plan, exercise frequency, intensity, or duration
should not increase more than 10% each week to avoid overtraining
or injury (57). While 10% may not seem like a significant increase,
when these increases and their associated adaptations are added
over a longer period of months and years, the adaptations and
performance improvements are substantial and achieved while
minimizing the risks of injury and overtraining. However, for athletes
preparing for long-distance events, and especially those starting
from a low fitness level, it may be necessary to adjust this guideline
for a small number of weeks within the larger training plan. It should
be noted that if an increase in training volume above 10% is
implemented, it is critical that before doing so monitoring systems
for physical and psychological overtraining symptoms are determined
and implemented on a regular basis to recognize indications of
overtraining and possible injury early on. For example, a cyclist
riding 68 miles per week across three sessions may increase their
18-mile tempo and 18-mile interval sessions by 10%, thereby
increasing each session by about 2 miles. Given the relatively high
intensity of these training sessions, this would be appropriate.
1533
