Targeted and Structured Warm-Ups
Activities undertaken within warm-ups using this structure of general
and specific warm-ups vary considerably. Consequently, although
athletes may be performing an appropriately structured warm-up,
this cannot ensure that the warm-up itself adequately addresses the
key variables required to optimize subsequent performance (36).
Effective planning needs to carefully consider the specific
requirements of the subsequent performance and how the warm-up
can ensure that any necessary responses are elicited. Additionally,
the needs and capacities of the athletes should be considered and
be planned according to any specific logistical and environmental
factors. It is also important that planning delineates between warm-
ups used before competition and the more ubiquitous warm-ups
used within a training session, because the ultimate objectives of
both can be quite different. Whereas the key objective in a
precompetition warm-up is to maximize performance in that
competition, the training warm-up, as well as optimizing acute
performance, can contribute to performance in other productive
ways and across a wider range of timescales (49). Subsequently, the
planning process for these is different. For example, planning for
competition warm-up is totally focused on the short-term
maximization of performance, whereas training warm-ups can also
consider how the process contributes to the overall development of
the athlete; this planning can therefore entail short-, medium-, and
long-term considerations (48).
Medium- and long-term planning is a recent trend with regard to
planning effective warm-ups (50). Athletes spend a great deal of
training time warming up, so structures that allow optimal use of this
time provide a potentially powerful tool for the coach (51). Effective
warm-ups should be thought of as an integral part of a training
session, not as a separate entity (51). With most training warm-ups
lasting from 10 to 20 minutes, over a training cycle this contributes
to a significant amount of training time; with effective planning, this
860
