Power, Other Core, Then Assistance Exercises
Power exercises such as weightlifting movements and their derivatives (e.g.,
snatch, hang power clean, jump shrug) and other ballistic exercises (e.g., jump
squat or hexagonal barbell jump) should be performed first in a training session,
followed by other non-power core exercises, and then assistance exercises. This
is due to the large neuromuscular demand placed on the body by power
exercises because they require greater levels of skill and are prone to fatigue
(71). The literature also refers to this arrangement as multijoint exercises and
then single-joint exercises or large muscle areas and then small muscle areas
(151, 183). Athletes who become fatigued are prone to using poor technique
and consequently are at higher risk of injury. The explosive movements and
extensive muscular involvement of power exercises also result in substantial
energy expenditure (138). This is another reason to have athletes perform such
exercises first, while they are still metabolically fresh. If power exercises are not
selected in step 2 (exercise selection), the recommended order of exercises is
core exercises (ideally with the most demanding exercises first) and then
assistance exercises. This is an important consideration because researchers
have shown that greater maximal strength adaptations may be produced with
the exercises programmed earlier in a training session (44, 152) while the latter
exercises may be negatively affected due to the accumulated fatigue (116, 150,
152).
Lower and Upper Body Exercises (Alternated)
One method of providing the opportunity for athletes to recover more fully
between exercises is to alternate lower body exercises with upper body
exercises. This arrangement is especially helpful for untrained individuals who
find that completing several lower or upper body exercises in succession is too
strenuous (50). Also, if training time is limited, this method of arranging
exercises minimizes the length of the rest periods required between exercises
and maximizes the rest between body areas. The result is a decrease in overall
training time because the athlete can perform a lower body exercise and then
immediately go to an upper body exercise without having to wait for the lower
body to rest. However, when choosing an order between lower and upper body
exercises, strength and conditioning professionals should consider prescribing
lower body exercises first since these movements typically involve more muscle
mass and may place a greater overall stress on the body due to the absolute
loads that will be used. If the exercises are performed with minimal rest periods
(20-30 s), this method is also referred to as circuit training (generally not
optimal for the development of maximal strength)—a method sometimes also
1218
