Control of the Phosphagen System
The phosphagen system reactions (often represented by equations
3.1, 3.2, and 3.3) are largely controlled by the law of mass action
or the mass action effect (109). The law of mass action states
that the concentrations of reactants or products (or both) in solution
will drive the direction of the reactions. With enzyme-mediated
reactions, such as the reactions of the phosphagen system, the rate
of product formation is greatly influenced by the reactant
concentrations. This is denoted in equations 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 by the
two-way arrow between reactants and products. For example, as
ATP is hydrolyzed to yield the energy necessary for exercise
(equation 3.1), there is a transient increase in ADP concentrations
(as well as Pi) in the sarcolemma. This will increase the rate of
creatine kinase and adenylate kinase reaction (equations 3.2 and
3.3) to replenish the ATP supply. The process will continue until the
exercise ceases or the intensity reduces such that it does not deplete
CP stores and thus glycolysis or the oxidative system can become
the primary supplier of ATP and rephosphorylate the free creatine
(equation 3.2) (37). At this point, the sarcoplasmic concentration of
ATP will remain steady or increase, which will slow down or reverse
the directions of the creatine kinase and adenylate kinase reactions.
As a result, equations 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 are often referred to as
near-equilibrium reactions that proceed in a direction dictated by
the concentrations of the reactants due to the law of mass action.
Glycolytic System
Glycolysis is the breakdown of carbohydrate—either as glycogen
stored in the muscle or glucose delivered via the blood—to
resynthesize ATP (22, 145). The process of glycolysis involves
multiple enzymatically catalyzed reactions (figure 3.2). As a result,
the ATP resynthesis rate during glycolysis is not as rapid as with the
single-step phosphagen system; however, the capacity to produce
ATP is much higher due to a larger supply of glycogen and glucose
183
