benefits beyond improvements in athletic performance due to
improved reaction time and cognitive processing include a reduction
in the risk of falls later in life (2).
During puberty the production of estrogen in girls increases fat
deposition 
and 
breast 
development, 
whereas 
testosterone
production in boys increases bone formation and protein synthesis.
Though estrogen also stimulates bone growth, boys have a longer
growth period and commence puberty at a later stage, and therefore
adult men tend to achieve greater overall stature than adult women
(2). On average, adult females tend to have more body fat, less
muscle, and lower bone mineral density than adult males.
Furthermore, females tend to be lighter in total body weight than
males. Anthropometric measurements of adults indicate that males
tend to have broader shoulders relative to their hips and females
tend to have broader hips relative to their waist and shoulders. The
broader shoulders in males can support more muscle tissue and can
also provide a mechanical advantage for muscles acting at the
shoulder. Although some female athletes have lower fat percentages
than untrained males, extremely low body fat percentages in
females may be associated with adverse health consequences (124,
125).
Maintaining skeletal muscle mass and bone mineral density is
important for both athletic performance and health. Without a
sustained resistance training program, muscle mass and bone
density begin a pattern of decline in the mid-30s, which can
accelerate after approximately age 50, especially when accompanied
by menopause (120, 152). Therefore, females should be encouraged
to participate in long-term resistance training programs to counteract
the skeletal and muscular changes that will otherwise occur with
aging. Another benefit of maintaining or increasing muscle mass
aside from athletic performance is the extension of the time females
can engage in sport and reduce their risk of injury (154), as well as
maintaining the ability to perform activities of daily living and
independence into old age (18, 121, 182).
440
