Treatment Goal
The treatment goal during the fibroblastic repair phase is to prevent
excessive muscle atrophy and joint deterioration of the injured area.
In addition, a precarious balance must be maintained in which
disruption of the newly formed collagen fibers is avoided but low-
load stresses are gradually introduced to allow increased collagen
synthesis and prevent loss of joint motion. To protect the new,
relatively weak collagen fibers in the early reparative phase, the
athlete should avoid active resistive exercise involving the damaged
tissue and may opt for submaximal activities such as functional
movements against gravity or isometric resistance. Too little activity,
though, can also have a deleterious effect, because newly formed
fibers will not optimally align and may form adhesions (abnormal
collection of cells and collagen that lack pliability), thereby
preventing full motion. Early protected motion hastens the optimal
alignment of collagen fibers and promotes improved tissue mobility.
As in the inflammatory phase, therapeutic modalities are permissible,
but their goal during repair is to promote collagen synthesis and
manage pain. Ultrasound, electrical stimulation, and ice are
continued in order to support and hasten new tissue formation (40,
82). Again, maintenance of muscular and cardiorespiratory function
remains essential for the uninjured areas of the body. The strength
and conditioning professional has considerable expertise to offer the
other members of the allied health team regarding selection of the
appropriate activities. Possible exercise forms during the repair
phase include strengthening of the uninjured extremities and areas
proximal and distal to the injury, aerobic and anaerobic exercise, and
improving strength and neuromuscular control of the involved areas.
Exercise Strategies
The following exercises should be used during the repair phase only
after consultation with the team physician, athletic trainer, or
physical therapist. Isometric exercise may be performed, provided
that it is pain free and otherwise indicated by the physician or
1648
