Efficacy
The purported ergogenic benefits commonly attributed to anabolic
steroid use are increased muscle mass, strength, and athletic
performance, particularly in sports requiring maximal strength levels.
When anabolic steroids are taken at supraphysiologic doses, these
ergogenic benefits are realized (25). The degree and incidence of
these changes are variable, depending greatly on, among other
factors, the training status of the individual (25).
Muscle Mass and Strength
One of the primary reasons athletes and nonathletes take anabolic
steroids is to increase lean muscle mass and maximal strength. If
such improvements do occur, this will lead to better performance on
the field, with all other variables of athleticism held constant. When
anabolic steroids are given in doses similar to those used by
recreationally trained and competitive athletes, increases in muscle
protein synthesis are seen (98). These increases in protein synthesis
are likely responsible for the increases observed in lean body mass in
both recreationally trained and competitive athletes taking anabolic
steroids (107, 210). Even when anabolic steroids are administered to
normal adult men not engaged in intensive resistance training,
increases in body mass, including the nonfat component, are
observed (25, 69). The extent to which gains in lean body mass and
maximal strength occur with anabolic steroid use has been reported
in the scientific literature as a case study (3). In this study, an adult
male 
international-level 
bodybuilder 
self-injected 
androgenic
hormones (at a dosage of 53 mg/day) for a training period of one
year that included only a four-week abstinence from drugs in the
middle of the year. During this time, the bodybuilder was able to
gain about 7 kilograms (15 lb) of fat-free weight, increase the mean
fiber area of the vastus lateralis muscle by approximately 11% in six
months’ time, and significantly increase maximal strength. Despite
these improvements in muscle mass and strength, the individual’s
health status was negatively affected. Specifically, after drug
675
