Neuromuscular System
Muscle fibers are innervated by motor neurons that transmit
impulses in the form of electrochemical signals from the spinal cord
to the muscle. A motor neuron generally has numerous terminal
branches at the end of its axon, allowing for several muscle fibers to
be innervated. This integrated structure is termed the motor unit.
Motor units can be generally described as slow-twitch, fast-
twitch/fatigue-resistant, and fast-twitch/fatigable. These motor unit
characteristics dictate muscle fiber type, contractile characteristics,
and involvement in different types of activities and exercise.
Activation of Muscles
When a motor neuron fires an impulse or action potential, all the
muscle fibers that it innervates are simultaneously activated and
contract through the mechanisms previously described. The number
of muscle fibers vary within each motor unit. Muscles that are
required to function with great precision, such as eye muscles, may
have motor units with as few as one muscle fiber. Changes in the
number of active motor units in these small muscles can produce the
extremely fine gradations in force that are necessary for precise
movements of the eyeball. In contrast, the quadriceps muscle group,
which moves the leg with much less precision, may have several
hundred muscle fibers innervated by one motor neuron.
An action potential is an electrochemical signal that travels along
a motor neuron from the cell body to the nerve terminal. However,
this signal is not capable of directly exciting muscle fibers. Instead,
the arrival of the action potential at nerve terminals of the motor
neuron 
causes 
the 
secretion 
of 
a 
neurotransmitter 
called
acetylcholine to each of the neuromuscular junctions contained
within the motor unit. Secreted acetylcholine binds to and activates
acetylcholine receptors present on the sarcolemma of muscle fibers
within the motor unit. Once enough acetylcholine receptors are
activated, action potentials are generated along the sarcolemma of
56
