are often given. However, when the athlete demonstrates persistent
(two to three weeks) negative affect, cognition, or behaviors,
referral for more support to a counselor or psychologist may be
needed. Also, if the behavior becomes disruptive to other teammates
or training partners, the coach is tasked with assessing the situation,
making a judgment related to management of the athlete’s behavior,
and deciding how best to address or support the athlete toward
positive behaviors.
In the future, challenges to mental health in athletics could also
come from social media; name, image, and likeness (NIL); and
temporary commitments or lack of identification with a program
facilitated by the college transfer portal. Thus, a higher level of social
comparison and self-esteem challenges will likely be stressors for
athletes. Imperative to the preparation for future strength and
conditioning professionals will be skill building and resources related
to these emerging challenges.
When subclinical anxiety, depression, or stress are seen by the
coach, a plan can be made to change behavior, team environment,
and emotional management. Subclinical issues include low-level and
short-term mental or emotional distress that are not serious enough
to affect athletes’ personal, academic, and social roles. These often
do not last longer than a week and do not disrupt sleep, eating, and
social functioning. However, when persistent issues or disruptions
become more chronic and severe, a professional referral to a mental
health specialist is clearly warranted. When more chronic issues
arise, the coach should seek support of the sports medicine staff
(e.g., athletic trainers, nutritionists, team physicians) as well as the
mental health community in a respectful way (maintaining
confidentiality, dignity, and communication with the athlete), so
prioritizing mental well-being is the first goal. By developing a
reference list of professionals in the school, surrounding community,
or athletic department, the strength and conditioning professional
can be better prepared for mental health issues should they arise.
510
