in oxygen delivered to the tissue, carbon dioxide returned to the
lungs, and minute ventilation (the volume of air breathed per
minute) provide for appropriate levels of alveolar gas concentrations
during aerobic exercise (27).
With aerobic exercise, increased minute ventilation occurs as a
result of increases in the depth of breathing, frequency of breathing,
or both. During strenuous exercise, the breathing frequency of
healthy young adults usually increases from 12 to 15 breaths per
minute at rest to 35 to 45 breaths per minute, while tidal volume
(TV), the amount of air inhaled and exhaled with each breath,
increases from resting values of 0.4 to 1 L to as much as 3 L or
greater. Consequently, the minute ventilation can increase to 15 to
25 times the resting value, or to values of 90 to 150 L of air per
minute (14, 17, 27).
During low- to moderate-intensity aerobic exercise, there is an
increase in ventilation directly associated with both increased oxygen
uptake and carbon dioxide production. In this instance, the increase
in ventilation is primarily due to increased tidal volume. The ratio of
minute ventilation to oxygen uptake is termed the ventilatory
equivalent and ranges between 20 and 25 L of air per L of oxygen
consumed. In more intense exercise (generally above 45% to 65%
of maximal oxygen uptake in untrained individuals and 70% to 90%
in trained athletes), breathing frequency takes on a greater role. At
these levels, minute ventilation rises disproportionately to the
increases in oxygen uptake and begins to parallel the abrupt rise in
blood lactate. At this point, the ventilatory equivalent may increase
to 35 or 40 L of air per L of oxygen consumed with this high-
intensity activity (14, 27).
With inspiration, air enters the alveoli, the functional unit of the
pulmonary system where gas exchange occurs. However, with
inspiration, air also occupies areas of the respiratory passages: the
nose, mouth, trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles. This area is not
functional for gas exchange and is called the anatomical dead
space. The normal volume of this air space is approximately 150 mL
89
