High-intensity intermittent sports can lead to some degree of muscle damage
depending on many factors including the time and intensity of play and body
size. Studies show that consuming protein after exercise helps decrease some
markers of muscle damage (42). And though postexercise carbohydrate intake
can affect performance in a subsequent event or training session, particularly
when sessions are close together in time, the addition of protein will likely not
affect performance in a subsequent bout of exercise during the 4-hour recovery
period following the initial event or exercise session (85).
Strength and Power Sports
Athletes in strength and power sports rely on both blood glucose and glycogen
for energy during competition. Because a single bout of resistance training can
lead to significant reductions in glycogen (78) and decreases in glycogen can
impair force production and isometric strength while accentuating muscle
weakness, it is imperative that these athletes restore glycogen levels before their
next bout of exercise (47). During the recovery period after strength and power
competitions, athletes should focus on consuming higher-glycemic carbohydrates
immediately after exercise if they must compete or train again over the course of
the 24-hour period after the initial training session or competition. The amount
of carbohydrate they need to fully replenish glycogen stores depends on many
factors, including intensity and the time spent competing, their overall body
weight and muscle mass, their preexercise meal (and state of glycogen stores
before competition), and whether they consumed carbohydrate during the
competition. In a crossover study, after an overnight fast, eight men who
completed 6 sets of single-leg knee extensions at 70% of the 1RM, until 50% of
full knee extension was no longer possible, depleted glycogen levels by
approximately 29%. Within 6 hours of the completion of training, they restored
up to 91% of their preexercise levels after consuming 1.5 gram of carbohydrate
per kilogram body weight immediately after the resistance training session and
again 1 hour later. However, when study subjects consumed water only
immediately after training and again 1 hour later, they barely restored their
muscle glycogen content to 75% of preexercise levels (104).
Net protein balance depends on both muscle protein synthesis and
breakdown. And though carbohydrates have no effect on muscle protein
synthesis, they help attenuate acute protein breakdown resulting from resistance
exercise. The increase in protein breakdown likely depends on the resistance
stimulus, the person’s overall nutrition intake, and dietary intake before and
during training or competition. One study in untrained young men found that
acute protein breakdown increased by 51% ± 17% after a bout of resistance
training (16). In another study, the rate of both mixed muscle protein fractional
634
