A concentrate, metabolite, constituent, extract, or combination of any
ingredient listed above
The product must also be labeled as a dietary supplement, such that the
label must include the term dietary supplement or equivalent and therefore
cannot also be advertised for use as a conventional food or as the sole item
within a meal or diet.
Ergogenic 
substances 
are 
usually 
banned 
from 
athletic
competition when a consensus is reached that they may provide an
unfair competitive edge or pose a significant health risk. This
prohibition does not need to be based on conclusive proof that a
substance does anything advantageous; it simply represents an
agreement among administrators or clinicians that this may be the
case. As mentioned previously, every sport’s governing body
publishes its own list of banned substances. Probably the most
widely recognized international organization regulating doping
worldwide is the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), which oversees
the doping controls and establishes the banned substances list for
the International Olympic Committee (61). Each country has an
affiliated agency (e.g., United States Anti-Doping Agency [USADA],
United Kingdom Anti-Doping [UKAD], and Sport Integrity Australia
[SIA]) that oversees anti-doping controls for Olympic sports.
Additionally, in some countries these organizations also oversee
doping controls for professional sports (i.e., UKAD and SIA). The
prohibited substances list is standardized and updated by WADA
each year. While the WADA list is the international standard, other
organizations, such as collegiate and professional sports in the
United States, have different prohibited substances lists as well as
penalties for doping. Regardless of which organization regulates
doping controls, it is incumbent upon the athlete, sport coach,
strength and conditioning professional, and all support staff to
ensure that they are compliant with their respective organization’s
anti-doping policies. Figure 12.1 lists the National Collegiate Athletic
Association banned drug classes (updated in 2023). This list is used
by many universities in the United States and is subject to change
664
