loading is prescribed for longer than six weeks (186). Involution related to poor
fatigue management may be the product of nonfunctional overreaching without
the inclusion of proper recovery, however (54, 55). While the loss of fitness
characteristics could be mitigated by incorporating retaining loads (i.e., small
percentage of overall training volume focused on maintaining a desired
characteristic) (42), it is important that strength and conditioning professionals
understand the difference between retaining loads and the minimal effective
dose needed to maintain or develop a fitness characteristic.
The training goals and needs of each athlete are unique and should therefore
command a training program suited specifically for them; this training principle is
termed individualization. Athletes competing in different sports, the same
sport, or in different events come with different genetic characteristics and
training histories that affect how they respond to various training stimuli. As
such, strength and conditioning professionals should always avoid a cookie
cutter approach to designing training programs and should instead focus on
providing individualized training programs that help each athlete reach their
training goals. While this may seem simplistic, it is important to note that many
aspects of different training programs may be similar or even identical. For
example, general strength characteristics for the lower body may be addressed
by prescribing one of many core exercises such as the back squat, leg press,
hex-bar deadlift, and so on (figure 18.2); however, a training program focused
on this fitness characteristic will likely have more than one lower body exercise,
and thus the likelihood of overlap between programs is high. Taking this into
consideration, strength and conditioning professionals may find that 80% to
90% of the exercises used in a training program are similar for multiple athletes,
while 10% to 20% of the exercises will be individualized. It is important to note
that the loads programmed for these exercises are always individualized to each
athlete’s capabilities.
1192
