Classification
Obesity
class
BMIa
(kg/m2)
DISEASE RISKb RELATIVE TO NORMAL
WEIGHT AND WAIST CIRCUMFERENCE
Men <102 cm (<40
in)
Women <88 cm (<35
in)
Men >102 cm (>40
in)
Women >88 cm (>35
in)
Severely
underweight
<16.5
Underweight
<18.5
Normal
18.5-24.9
Overweight
25.0-29.9
Increased
High
Obesity
I
30.0-34.9
High
Very high
II
35.0-39.9
Very high
Very high
Extreme obesity
III
≥40
Extremely high
Extremely high
Note: Increased waist circumference can also be a marker for increased risk even in persons of normal
weight.
aBMI may overestimate fat in athletes and others with muscular builds and underestimate fat in older
persons and others who have lost muscle. To estimate BMI using kilograms and meters, use this equation:
body weight (kilograms) / height (meters)2. To estimate BMI using pounds and inches, use this equation:
body weight (pounds) / height (inches)2 × 703.
bDisease risk for type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease.
Reprinted from NHLBI Obesity Education Initiative Expert Panel on the Identification, Evaluation, and
Treatment of Obesity in Adults (1998).
Rapid Weight Loss
Though there is no uniform definition in the literature, rapid weight loss generally
refers to quick weight loss, faster than can be achieved by lowering calorie
intake and increasing exercise, in a short period of time (38). Athletes may use a
variety of techniques to cut weight quickly to compete in a desired weight class,
meet a weight goal set by their coach, or improve performance. Potentially
dangerous weight loss techniques may include fasting, fad diets, voluntary
dehydration (diuretics, sauna, water and salt manipulation, wearing multiple
layers of clothing), excessive spitting, self-induced vomiting, laxative abuse, and
inappropriate or excessive use of thermogenic aids (38).
Athletes who attempt to lose too much weight too quickly may lose lean body
mass, feel fatigued, experience headaches or mood swings, put their training
and performance in jeopardy, and suffer from several potentially serious side
effects. These include dehydration, heat illness, muscle cramping, fatigue,
dizziness, suppressed immune system functioning, hormone imbalances,
hyperthermia, reduced muscle strength, decreased plasma and blood volume,
648
