Muscular Strength
A review of more than 100 studies has shown that mean strength can
increase approximately 40% in untrained, 20% in moderately trained, 16% in
trained, 10% in advanced, and 2% in elite participants over periods ranging
from four weeks to two years (10).
With training, a positive shift in muscle fiber types reflects an augmented
recruitment of higher-order motor units. Type IIx fibers transition to type IIa
fibers and reflect a greater fatigue resistance at similar absolute force output
as well as an increase in muscle myofibrillar content through hypertrophy
(146).
Power
The optimal load for maximizing absolute peak power output in the jump
squat is 0% of the 1RM (i.e., body weight [31]). However, it has been
reported that peak power output is maximized in trained power athletes with
higher loads corresponding to 30% to 60% of a squat 1RM (16).
Peak power in the squat is maximized at 56% of the 1RM and in the power
clean at 80% of the 1RM (31).
For the upper body, peak power output can be maximized during the ballistic
bench press throw using loads corresponding to 46% to 62% of a bench
press 1RM (15, 128).
Local Muscular Endurance
Cross-sectional data in anaerobic athletes have shown enhanced muscular
endurance and subsequent muscular adaptations consistent with improved
oxidative and buffering capacity (60).
Skeletal muscle adaptations to anaerobic muscular endurance training include
fiber-type transitions from type IIx to type IIb, as well as increases in
mitochondrial and capillary numbers, buffering capacity, resistance to fatigue,
and metabolic enzyme activity (60).
Body Composition
Resistance training can increase fat-free mass and reduce body fat by up to
9% (116).
Increases in lean tissue mass, daily metabolic rate, and energy expenditure
during exercise are outcomes of resistance training (53).
Flexibility and Mobility
Anaerobic training potentially can have a positive impact on flexibility, and a
combination of resistance training and stretching appears to be the most
effective method to improve flexibility with increasing muscle mass (8). When
exercises are performed properly through a full range of motion, mobility may
331
