General Guidelines
With the use of alternative modes and nontraditional
implement exercises, the general guidelines are not very different
from those used with traditional resistance training methods. A
stable body position that allows the athlete to achieve and maintain
safe and proper body alignment during the performance of the
exercise is needed to appropriately stress the skeletal muscle
system. Freestanding ground-based exercises typically use a position
in which the feet are placed slightly wider than shoulder width. With
the use of instability devices, the body position may need to be
modified to ensure that stability is achieved. The grip used with
alternative modes and nontraditional implement exercises is typically
one of the traditional grips presented in chapter 16. The choice of
grip is based on the demands of the particular exercise. Additionally,
with many nontraditional implements, the grip can be a limiting
factor in the performance of the exercise.
As with more traditional exercises, the breathing pattern often
recommended with these alternative methods is for the athlete to
exhale through the sticking point (concentric portion) and to
inhale during the less stressful portion (eccentric portion) of the
movement. For example, athletes doing the dumbbell chest press on
a stability ball would inhale as they lower the dumbbells to the chest
and exhale as they push them away from the chest. With structural
exercises (those that load the axial skeleton), breath holding may
be warranted. However, when one is lifting loads greater than 80%
of maximal voluntary contraction or lifting lighter loads to failure, the
Valsalva maneuver (forced expiration against a closed glottis) may
be unavoidable (19, 47). The Valsalva maneuver allows for an
increase in the intra-abdominal pressure that augments the stability
of the spine, which may be beneficial for performing nontraditional
exercises. For example, with the log clean, the athlete may perform
the Valsalva maneuver during the pull and catch portion of the
exercise. The athlete would then exhale after assuming an erect
1090
