technique by which psychological and physical arousal are self-
regulated through the control of skeletal muscle tension. In essence,
by going through a series of alternating muscular tensing and
relaxing phases, the athlete learns to become aware of somatic
tension and thereby control it. The hope is that a relaxed body will
promote a relaxed mind.
These tensing and relaxing cycles progress from one muscle
group to the next until all muscle groups are optimally relaxed. Each
cycle involves maximally tensing each muscle for a short period of
time (10-15 s), followed by a conscious attempt to relax that muscle
completely, before moving on to the next muscle group. With
practice, an athlete learns to rapidly discern the difference between
a tense muscle and a relaxed one and then actively take steps to
generate the needed muscular relaxation.
In many cases, a positive side effect of the reduced muscle
tension is an increase in smooth, fluid, or efficient movement as well
as an increased range of motion around the joint. This can be an
effective self-regulation technique for some athletes before practice
or competition, or even during an intense moment in a given
contest. Therefore, athletes should practice this technique in the
days leading up to competition (rather than on the day of) to
determine its individual impact.
Autogenic Training
For athletes who are injured or who for some reason find it
uncomfortable or impractical to experience high muscular tension
levels, the PMR cycle for each muscle group can be replaced with an
attentional state that simply focuses on the sense of warmth and
heaviness for a particular limb or muscle group. This technique,
referred to as autogenic training, consists of a series of exercises
designed to produce physical sensations in the body—generally
warmth and heaviness (64). Because autogenic training eliminates
the need for uncomfortable levels of muscle tension in the
contraction–relaxation 
cycles, 
older 
athletes 
or 
athletes 
in
492
