at venues, time restrictions of when athletes need to be at certain
positions, and so on limit the potential to apply modalities that
require equipment, such as resistance training modalities, and it may
be more prudent to look at methods that are more user friendly and
can be incorporated into current warm-up modalities, such as the
application of plyometrics. Here consideration needs to be placed not
just on what modality generates the greatest potential enhancement
but also on what can be effectively applied into warm-up routines.
Throughout this analysis the potential for residual fatigue generation
must be considered, which may outweigh the positive impact over
an extended time period.
In terms of using PAPE within a training session warm-up, the
interindividual differences will always present a challenge. What is
important is that the case for PAPE does not blind the strength and
conditioning professional to the overall goals of a session. For
example, if a heavy squat stimulus was used to prime a jump
performance but a rest period of 12 minutes was required to
optimize the effect, the net effect on training volume within the
session may far outweigh the potentially positive effects of PAPE.
What is more likely is that the use of contrast-type methodologies in
activities that may generate less PAPE but also require less recovery
time between the preconditioning activity and the main activity may
be more applicable. At this time, PAPE is an alluring concept but one
still being studied for effective application. See tables 15.2 and 15.3
for examples of CNS preparatory exercise combinations.
TABLE 15.2 Lower Body CNS Preparatory Exercise
Combinations
Preconditioning activity
Variables
Main activity
Back squat (see page 439)
Load: 60%-90% 1RM
Sets: 1-3
Reps: 1-3
Countermovement jump
Note: These are examples; the precise pre- and postconditioning activity should be
adjusted to suit the needs of the session. Similarly, the precise variables should be
adjusted to the needs of the athlete and the activity.
870
