approach for the management of injuries in the inflammatory stage
of healing as a result of improved outcome measures and faster
recovery (5, 20).
It is also important to realize that a quick return to function relies
on the health of other body tissues. Therefore, the power, strength,
and endurance of the musculoskeletal tissues and the function of the
cardiorespiratory system must be maintained. The strength and
conditioning professional can provide significant knowledge and
expertise in this area. To accomplish these tasks, the strength and
conditioning professional should consult with the athletic trainer to
determine which types of exercises are indicated and contraindicated
for the specific injury. Maximal protection of the injured structures is
the primary goal during this phase. Assuming that this requirement
is fulfilled, exercises may include general aerobic and anaerobic
training and resistance training of the uninjured extremities. If
movement of the injured limb is not contraindicated, isolated
exercises that target areas proximal and distal to the injured area
may also be permissible provided that they do not stress the injured
area. Examples include hip abduction and external rotation exercises
following a knee injury (24, 39, 65) or scapula-stabilizing exercises
following a shoulder injury (57, 94, 100).
To Ice or Not to Ice
Ice applications, also referred to as cryotherapy, have been used for centuries to
decrease pain and inflammation following an injury (51). Advancements in
cryotherapy methods from ice packs or ice massage and cold-water immersion to
more advanced devices such as continuous cooling systems, vapor and gaseous
sprays, and total body cooling have emerged, providing numerous application
options. As part of the POLICE method for the management of acute injuries, early
pain-free movement and ice are emphasized (5, 20). However, the use of ice has
been questioned in both the strength and conditioning and allied health
professions due to the potential for delaying natural post-injury healing processes
and impeding muscle performance (52). These concerns, largely unsupported in
the literature, stem from the potential of ice to cause a vasoconstriction of blood
vessels (45), which may limit the ability of healing agents to reach the site of
injury. While this concern is reasonable, there is no evidence that icing alone
1646
