Social norms and the environment should be considered when
helping an athlete seek mental health support. Athletes in team
sports may wish to have privacy while getting support. Because
social stigmas and mental health treatment can sometimes clash,
the strength and conditioning professional should attempt to be
aware of individual preferences and readiness for support. Not all
mental health issues are covered in this chapter (e.g., substance
abuse, eating disorders, bullying or hazing, body dysmorphia,
gender identity, social phobias, and trauma) so further education is
recommended for strength and conditioning professionals as they
work with diverse populations of athletes.
Mental Health Case Studies
The strength and conditioning professional can use the list of signs and symptoms
of anxiety, depression, and stress found in table 9.1 (page 182) to frame how each
athlete is feeling (step 1), then determine how long and how critical those signs
and symptoms are to the athlete (step 2), and decide a course of action to refer
the athlete to the appropriate support professional (step 3).
Case Study 1
Tanner has been swimming all summer and feels tired and demotivated. He is a
high school junior, ready for his senior year, and feels like his friends are too busy
to spend time with him. This has lasted for one week. He reports that no matter
how hard he tries, he cannot get better. During workouts he reports not wanting to
swim anymore. His workout effort is decreasing, but he still completes all sets. He
paces in the water between sets and looks uncomfortable. Socially, he has not
been talking to his friends during workouts but reports a good social life outside of
the strength and conditioning programming.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Pacing, reduced effort, lack of social interactions during the workouts, and
decreased effort and motivation
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
One week in duration, not affecting things outside of sport
Step 3: Referral Source
Performance coach or consultant
Case Study 2
511
