provided to women’s sports on an equal basis as given to men’s
sports.
Preparticipation Screening and Medical
Clearance
Before an athlete is allowed access to the strength and conditioning
facility, preparticipation screening and clearance in accordance with
relevant governing bodies (e.g., NCAA, institution sports medicine
staff, and high school athletic associations) are required. This
requirement is established under Section 1 of NSCA Strength and
Conditioning Professional Standards and Guidelines (30). Standard
1.1 “requires participants to undergo health care provider screening
and clearance before participation.” The strength and conditioning
professional does not need an actual copy of the physical
examination but should require a signed statement to show proof of
medical clearance to participate. Athletes who are returning from an
injury or illness or who have special needs (e.g., diabetes, asthma,
epilepsy, hypertension) should also be required to show proof of
medical clearance before beginning or returning to a strength and
conditioning program.
Procedures should therefore be in place to ensure that
documentation confirming that each athlete was screened and
cleared to participate by the sports medicine staff is on record in the
main office of the strength and conditioning program before athletes
are allowed to participate. Note, however, that it is the responsibility
of the sports medicine staff (e.g., the team or program’s certified
athletic trainer, physician, or physical therapist) to allow an athlete to
begin formal involvement in the strength and conditioning program.
In the case of a school location, this applies to both athletes who are
new to the school or program and athletes who are just recovering
from an injury or illness. This stipulation is important because it is
not in the strength and conditioning professional’s scope of
practice (i.e., proper legal parameters and professional duties) to
diagnose or evaluate an individual’s medical or health condition.
1795
