maneuver can have the undesirable side effect of exerting
compressive force on the heart, making it more difficult for blood to
return to the heart. Also, the Valsalva maneuver can transiently raise
blood pressure to slightly elevated levels (20). The diaphragm and
the abdominal muscles can contract without the glottis being closed,
however, creating the fluid ball in the abdomen without pressurizing
the chest compartment. This must be regarded as the safer way, of
the two options, to add support to the lower spine without building
up pressure in the chest, and it is the technique that should be used
for most resistance training. One can build up intra-abdominal
pressure without building up chest pressure by consciously keeping
the airway open. During a strenuous repetition, the abdominal
muscles and diaphragm contract reflexively, even with the airway
open. Athletes, particularly those who compete in weightlifting or
powerlifting, may choose to use the Valsalva maneuver if they
recognize and accept the risks involved and have the experience to
avoid increasing pressure to the point of blackout.
Weightlifting belts have been shown to increase intra-abdominal
pressure during resistance training and are therefore probably
effective in improving safety when used correctly (21, 38, 62). It has
been cautioned, however, that if an athlete performs all of the
exercises with a belt, the abdominal muscles that produce intra-
abdominal pressure might not get enough training stimulus to
develop optimally (21). It is particularly risky for an individual who
has become accustomed to wearing a belt to suddenly perform an
exercise without one, because the abdominal musculature might not
be capable of generating enough intra-abdominal pressure to
significantly reduce erector spinae muscle forces. The resulting
excessive compressive forces on the disks could increase the chance
of back injury. Conservative recommendations are as follows:
A weight belt is not needed for exercises that do not directly
affect the lower back.
For exercises directly stressing the back, an individual should
refrain from wearing a belt during lighter sets but may wear
165
