athletic trainer. Submaximal isometric exercise allows the athlete to
maintain neuromuscular function and improve strength with
movements performed at an intensity low enough that the newly
formed collagen fibers are not disrupted. Unfortunately, isometric
strengthening is joint angle specific; that is, strength gains occur
only at the angles used (46). Therefore, if indicated, it may be
appropriate for the athlete to perform isometric exercises at multiple
angles (46). Isokinetic exercise uses equipment that provides
resistance to movement at a given speed (e.g., 60°/s or 120°/s).
Because sport is not performed at a single consistent speed,
isokinetic exercise may be limited in real-world application as a
standalone exercise. Furthermore, most isokinetic equipment allows
single-joint exercise only, which permits concentration on a specific
muscle or joint but is not always the most functional method of
strengthening. While isokinetic machines may have a more limited
application in terms of strengthening specificity, these devices may
be of value for providing continuous passive motion early in the
post-injury or post-operative phases of healing and can be used to
assess muscle balance or ratios (e.g., quadriceps-to-hamstring
strength ratio).
While isotonic exercise (i.e., concentric and eccentric) involves
movements with constant external resistance, the amount of force
required to move the resistance varies, depending primarily on joint
angle and the length of each agonist muscle. Isotonic exercise uses
several different forms of resistance, including gravity (i.e., exercises
performed without equipment, with gravitational effects as the only
source of resistance), dumbbells, barbells, and weight stack
machines. Concentric and eccentric muscle actions can be used to
increase strength and appropriately stress healing tissues. Eccentric
exercise allows for greater force production and requires less energy
expenditure compared to concentric exercise and has been shown to
promote 
healing 
or 
tissue 
repair 
via 
the 
concept 
of
mechanotransduction (44, 61). Mechanotransduction occurs
when tissues are subject to overload, which communicates a
1649
