Intermittent High-Intensity Sports
Many team sports, such as soccer, tennis, basketball, and American football,
include repeated bouts of short-duration, high-intensity activity in addition to
involving a wide range of skills. Fatigue during play could stem from a number of
factors, including decreased or depleted glycogen stores and dehydration. The
provision of both fluids and carbohydrate is essential for performance during
prolonged intermittent sports. For instance, a long tennis match may last 4 hours
—considerably longer than many aerobic endurance events. Because tennis
players cannot drink continuously during a match and can lose more than 2.5
liters (84.5 fl oz) of fluid per hour, a recommendation of 200 to 400 milliliters
(6.7-13.5 fl oz) per changeover (switching sides) has been put forth for these
athletes (69). In addition to maintaining hydration status, research shows that
carbohydrate supplementation may not affect ratings of perceived exertion (46)
but improves stroke quality (which includes measures of velocity, precision, and
error rate) during prolonged play (141).
In soccer players, 5 milliliters (0.2 fl oz) per kilogram body weight of a 6.9%
glucose-polymer drink, consumed 15 minutes before each match and at halftime,
made no difference in several measures of performance such as successful
tackles, heading, dribbling, or shooting ability (150). Yet another soccer study,
this one with professional soccer players, found that the group consuming a
carbohydrate-electrolyte beverage improved some parameters of performance
during match play. In this study, 22 professional male soccer players consumed
the same diet for seven days (55% of the calories were derived from
carbohydrate, 25% from fat, and 20% from protein), refrained from exercise for
three days before the match, and consumed a standardized breakfast 4 hours
before the match on game day. They were divided into two groups, receiving
either a carbohydrate-electrolyte drink (7% carbohydrates, sodium 24 mmol/L,
chloride 12 mmol/L, potassium 3 mmol/L) or placebo. Each group drank 5
milliliters (0.2 fl oz) per kilogram body weight before the match and 2 milliliters
(0.1 fl oz) per kilogram body weight every 15 minutes during the 90-minute
game. The group receiving the carbohydrate-electrolyte drink finished the
specific dribble test faster than those receiving the placebo. In addition, ratings
of precision were higher in the carbohydrate-electrolyte trial versus placebo.
However, there were no differences in the coordination or power tests between
groups. In this particular study, supplementation with a carbohydrate-electrolyte
drink improved soccer-specific skill performance compared with a placebo (101).
In another study that found that during-play carbohydrate consumption was
beneficial, a randomized, double-blind protocol was used. Seventeen male soccer
players received 8 milliliters (0.3 fl oz) of a 6.4% carbohydrate-electrolyte
beverage per kilogram body weight before exercise plus 3 milliliters (0.1 fl oz)
628
