exercise economy (48, 53), which have both been strongly
associated with aerobic endurance performance. In cases where
improvements in aerobic endurance performance or factors
associated with this performance are similar from HIIT and
traditional low-intensity aerobic training, HIIT provides an advantage
by taking significantly less time to complete (23).
According to Buchheit and Laursen (22), for an optimal stimulus it
is necessary for athletes to spend a total of several minutes within
the HIIT session above 90% of the V̇ O2max. Both short (<45 s) and
long (2- to 4-min) HIIT intervals can be used to elicit different
training responses. For example, shorter intervals with higher
intensity may elicit positive changes in neuromuscular power and
exercise economy, and as the work duration for a single exercise
bout is increased, the energy contribution from fast glycolysis will
likely increase along with blood lactate levels, which may stimulate
improvements in lactate metabolism.
In performing HIIT, the appropriate amount of rest between
repetitions is critical. If the relief intervals are too short, the athlete
will be unable to put forth a quality effort on subsequent exercise
bouts and also will be at a greater risk for injury. If the rest periods
are too long, many of the benefits experienced from challenging the
glycolytic energy system will likely diminish. An example of an
appropriate work-to-rest ratio for long-interval HIIT training is ≥2 to
3 minutes at or above 90% V̇ O2max, with ≤2 minutes of passive or
low-intensity active recovery (21, 22, 77).
Fartlek Training
Fartlek training (the word Fartlek originates from the Swedish
term for speed play) is a combination of several of the previously
mentioned types of training. Although Fartlek training is generally
associated with running, it can also be used for cycling and
swimming. A sample Fartlek run involves easy running (~70%
V̇ O2max) combined with either hill work or short, fast bursts of
running (~85-90% V̇ O2max) for short time periods. Athletes can
1541
