area) stress on the athlete. See table 20.6 for a range of agility
factors that can be manipulated in agility drill design.
TABLE 20.6 Mechanical and Perceptual-Cognitive
Factors That Can Be Manipulated During Agility Drills
Variable
Factor
Interpretation
Mechanical
Spacing and
pitch or court
dimensions
Altering the space and pitch or court dimensions will vary
the distances traveled and subsequent entry and exit
velocities and momentum achieved, and therefore allow
athletes to develop agility from lower velocity, intensive
scenarios, to higher velocity, extensive scenarios.
Additionally, entry velocity regulates intensity and
subsequent mechanical loading experienced.
Entry and exit
velocity
momentum
Agility actions
and angle of
COD
Practitioners can put restrictions on the type of COD
action performed or allow athletes to try a range of
different COD actions to develop between-skill variability
and movement solutions. Additionally, varying the
location of end or target zones can allow athletes to
develop shallow, moderate, and sharp COD ability to
enable them to be proficient in changing direction across
a spectrum of angles.
Starting position
(static or
transitional
movements)
Athletes can begin the drill from different static initiation
(e.g., drop step, jab step) and from different transitional
movements (i.e., backpedal, crossover running, lateral
shuffle) to create drill variability and to increase game
representativeness and ability to evade or defend from
different locomotor actions.
Perceptual-
cognitive
Location and
number of
attackers or
defenders
The location of the defenders and attackers can be
manipulated. For example, in addition to front-on
situations, defenders can be located to the side or behind
the attackers. This is pertinent for 360-degree sports in
which defenders and attackers can be located in various
locations on the pitch or court. The addition of multiple
attackers and defenders can increase game
representativeness, allowing the opportunity for decoy
runs; attacking and defensive transitions and set plays;
team communication; and increased chaos, task
complexity, cognitive loading, and variability.
Note: 
COD 
= 
change 
of
direction.
1460
