anhedonia (lack 
of 
emotion), 
feelings 
of 
hopelessness 
or
helplessness, and low energy (26). Studies have identified that
depression can begin with poor performance, injury, concussion,
social comparisons, high expectations, and changes in social or
playing status (26, 31). Also affecting depression are changes in
feedback from coaches, behavioral deactivation, negative self-
perceptions, 
evaluations, 
and 
feelings 
of 
helplessness 
or
hopelessness. Stress is an imbalance between the demands of a task
or situation and the ability to cope with the challenge, as stated
earlier in this chapter. Chronic stress often interferes with sleep,
mood, and self-care habits. Because mental stress is unique to each
individual, it has many signs and symptoms. The most recognizable
signs of stress include urgency, agitation, and hurried speech.
Now that these states have been identified, how do coaches help
athletes get the appropriate support? One helpful way is a three-
step process that follows the content of Weinberg and Gould (64)
while adding the assessment of duration and disruption from more
traditional psychological evaluation. First, identify the signs and
symptoms of distress related to affect, behavior, and cognitions.
Second, determine the duration of distress (lasting greater than 2-3
weeks) and potential disruption (e.g., sleep patterns, nutritional
habits, social relationships). Specifically, is the distress temporary or
persistent, and how will it affect behaviors outside of sports? Third,
determine how to support the athlete. A question could follow: Is it
important to refer the athlete for more support, allow the athlete
time for self-reflection, or collaborate with the athlete to work on
centering or environmental management to change disruptive
performance-related responses?
The first step in identifying psychological signs of distress is
classifying the affect, behavior, and cognitions (ABCs) observed in
athletes (11, 64, 65). Affect refers to the mood and emotions seen in
and reported by the athlete. For instance, an athlete might look
anxious, have a stressed face, report feeling hopeless, or have a
persistent negative expression. Behavior refers to movements like
508
