may have a higher propensity for fiber shifting and other factors such as the
tapering or other phase of training may affect these shifts (125, 102). From a
performance standpoint, these metabolic and fiber changes result in a more
efficient use of aerobic energy production.
•  Exercise economy. The economy of exercise is mostly a function of
biomechanics and technique, which are influenced by the athlete’s metabolic,
cardiovascular, and neuromuscular efficiency and training (7). Two aerobic
endurance athletes may have the same maximal oxygen uptake and lactate
threshold yet not show the same performance outcomes. The athlete with better
economy would be able to race at a higher target pace or power for the same
amount of energy consumption, likely resulting in a better performance, even
though the two athletes have the same V̇ O2max and lactate threshold (23).
Every athlete needs a basic level of aerobic endurance—if not for
performance, for health reasons—that can be achieved using a wide
variety of training modalities and programs (see chapter 21 for more
information). Apart from the stereotypical submaximal aerobic
training methods, another method that can produce significant gains
in aerobic fitness (e.g., increased V̇ O2max, lactate threshold) is
interval training (16, 42, 92).
One of the most measured adaptations to aerobic endurance
training is an increase in maximal oxygen uptake associated with an
increase in maximal cardiac output (15, 31, 65, 161). As the
intensity of exercise increases, oxygen consumption rises to maximal
levels. When oxygen consumption can no longer increase to meet
the demands, maximal oxygen uptake has been achieved even in
the presence of continuing oxygen availability. Aerobic endurance
training can improve an athlete’s aerobic power by 5% to 30%,
depending, in part, on the starting fitness level as well as the genetic
potential of the individual (5). Most adaptations in maximal oxygen
consumption can be achieved within a 6- to 12-month training
period. 
After 
that, 
further 
changes 
in 
aerobic 
endurance
performance consist of increases in exercise economy and
increased lactate threshold (75). Metabolic changes include
increased respiratory capacity, lower blood lactate concentrations at
a given submaximal exercise intensity, increased mitochondrial and
357
