scale (117). Collectively, resistance training appears to be an
effective means to mitigate age-related dynapenia (76).
Improvements in gait speed, stair-climbing ability, balance, and
overall spontaneous activity have also been associated with training-
induced strength gains in older populations (145). Declines in muscle
power are associated with disability and the ability to perform ADL,
particularly in females (112), and the need to minimize age-related
deficits in muscle power is an important part of exercise prescription
for seniors (76, 112). Evidence indicates that resistance training
specific to power development may help optimize functional abilities
in older adults (2, 92, 178) and that power training may be as
effective as traditional resistance training in developing muscle
architecture and neuromuscular activation properties of the lower
limb (230). In some instances, it has been suggested that high-
velocity power training has a greater influence on the ability to
produce explosive force than traditional progressive resistance
training (92, 191). For example, Fielding and colleagues (74) showed
that older adults who completed high-velocity resistance training
made greater gains in peak power and similar gains in maximum
strength compared to seniors who trained at slower velocities over a
16-week training period. Similar results were reported by Reid and
colleagues (199); in that study, older adults who completed a high-
velocity, high-power resistance training program made significantly
greater gains in leg press peak power than individuals who followed
a slow-velocity, progressive resistance training program. While the
optimal training protocol for improving muscular strength and power
in seniors is not known, it appears a dose–response relationship
exists between training intensity and improvements in muscular
strength and power (44), with higher-intensity resistance training
being more effective in developing maximal muscle strength than
moderate- or low-intensity training (9, 214).
Regular participation in a resistance training program also seems
to have profound anabolic effects in older populations (33, 73, 80).
Computed tomography and muscle biopsy analysis showed evidence
425
