and conditioning professional should monitor the athlete’s body posture and make corrections
as needed.
4. After completing the last submaximal trial, the athlete should complete a minimum of three
maximum-effort trials separated by 1 to 2 minutes of rest. If the main goal of the test is to
determine the peak force that the athlete can produce, each trial should last between 3 and 5
seconds. If the rate of force development (RFD) is of interest, each trial should last up to 1
second (54). Regardless of which protocol is used, if the peak force between trials varies by
more than 15%, additional trials are warranted (105).
5. Regardless of the protocol used to collect the force–time curve, all trials need to be visually
screened to determine whether they meet preestablished criteria (29). If the strength and
conditioning professional notes any of the following, the trial should be discarded and another
trial should be conducted:
A quiet standing period of 1 s with >50 N change in force
Pre-tension (<50 N) while maintaining a rigid torso before initiating force application
A countermovement prior to the onset of force application
Peak force at the end of the pull
6. If the trial is deemed acceptable but the peak force of each trial is not within 15% of the
others, additional trials should be conducted.
7. When analyzing the results of an IMTP test, the most common measures include the peak
force and the force at specific time points (i.e., 50, 100, 150, 200, and 250 ms) (figure 14.5).
These metrics are often reported in absolute and relative terms (i.e., force per kg body
weight). Time-dependent variables such as the RFD and impulse are often quantified (and
reflect the change in force production during a certain time period as represented by Δ). The
peak RFD is typically quantified with a 20-millisecond moving window, while the RFD and
impulse are quantified during predetermined time windows (i.e., 0-50, 0-100, 0-200, and 0-250
ms).
Note: Normative data for the IMTP are presented in table 14.6 near the end of the chapter.
781
