guidelines and procedures, the risk of an epiphyseal plate fracture is
minimal.
Dispelling the Myths of Youth Resistance
Training
A wealth of evidence proves children and adolescents can safely and effectively
engage in resistance training to promote improvements in physical fitness, reduce
the risk of sport-related injury, and enhance measures of health and well-being.
However, there still remain certain unfounded myths among some health
professionals that may deter youth from engaging in resistance training (67).
Resistance training stunts bone growth.
False! Resistance training stimulates bone remodeling and strengthens bone,
muscular tissue, and connective tissue during childhood and adolescence.
Resistance training is unsafe for children.
False! With correct technique, appropriate loading, and high-quality instruction,
resistance training is a safe method of training for all youth.
Resistance training is only for young athletes.
False! Resistance training promotes positive physical and psychosocial adaptations
in all youth, regardless of whether they participate in competitive sports.
Children need to wait until puberty to realize the benefits of
resistance training.
False! Research clearly shows that young children can make meaningful gains in
physical fitness following resistance training. Children should be psychologically
mature enough to understand and follow instructions.
Young girls and boys will become “bulky.”
False! Studies have shown that resistance training during childhood stimulates
neuromuscular adaptations. During adolescence, boys will likely increase muscle
mass, but the lower levels of circulating androgens in girls mean they will
experience lower levels of absolute muscle growth.
Program Design Considerations for
Children
It is important to view resistance training as part of a well-rounded
long-term athletic development program for a child that also
addresses other fitness goals (e.g., speed, power, balance,
coordination, endurance). Although there is no minimal age
412
