Suspension Training Equipment
Suspension training equipment refers to commercially available ring,
handle, or strap setups (8). They are most often used for
bodyweight training focusing on upper body, lower body, and core.
The straps of a suspension training unit can be anchored
independent of each other (e.g., gymnastics ring) or connected by a
common anchor (e.g., eyelet and carabiner). Specific usage should
be in accordance with setup and loading guidelines determined by
the equipment manufacturer.
Safe and effective suspension training requires a stable
attachment point, level nonskid flooring, open space free of
obstacles, and handles that are easy to grip (e.g., not worn or
slippery) (8). Because suspension training equipment must be
attached to a fixed structure (e.g., load-bearing wall mount, bolted
rack, or rig frame), it is suggested that the strength and conditioning
professional regularly checks the integrity of the anchor point before
each use. Ideally, the anchor point should be between 7 to 9 feet
(2.1-2.7 m) above the floor. Further, suspension training equipment
should not be mounted in or near doorways to prevent blocking
emergency exits and hindering access to storage areas, cleaning
closets, locker rooms, and restrooms.
All accessories used to mount suspension training equipment
should be load bearing. As a general rule, any carabiner and snap
hook used for exercise purposes should be load-rated for physical
activity and include a secondary screw-locking mechanism to prevent
risks of falls or drops causing a potential injury. In the United States,
carabiners used for fall protection must meet OSHA standards, which
specify a minimum tensile (breaking) strength of 5,000 lbs (22kN)
(17). Outside of the United States, Conformité Européenne (CE) or
other third-party rating requirements should be referenced to select
connectors with appropriate load ratings for safety.
Table 25.2 summarizes the space needs for a range of exercise
types. Note that there are unique formulas that are specific to each
1757
