Research on the OTS sometimes identifies two types of OTS
related to the autonomic nervous system, specifically the
sympathetic overtraining syndrome (sometimes referred to as
SOTS) and the parasympathetic overtraining syndrome
(sometimes referred to as POTS) (126). First presented by Israel in
1976 (61), these syndromes were named based on how the
autonomic nervous system responded to the training stresses.
Parasympathetic Overtraining Syndrome
Initially named the Addisonoid syndrome since it is often
accompanied by decreased concentrations of the stress hormone
cortisol, this condition is characterized by the predominance of
parasympathetic 
activity. 
In 
general, 
the 
parasympathetic
overtraining syndrome is most often found in aerobic endurance
athletes where very large training volumes are common. Diagnosing
parasympathetic overtraining syndrome in aerobic endurance
athletes can be tricky since decreased resting heart rate (HRrest) is
typically a sign of beneficial cardiovascular adaptations to a training
program (e.g., decreased resting HR). However, in this case, the
decreased HR in already highly trained individuals is due to a
parasympathetic overtraining syndrome and the prerequisite training
program. It should be noted that the parasympathetic overtraining
syndrome does not cause the performance impairments, but rather
is a collection of symptoms typically resulting from the huge training
volumes often used by aerobic endurance athletes. Some of the
classic studies of the parasympathetic overtraining syndrome can be
found in the work of Manfred Lehmann and his research team’s
study of extremely large training volumes of middle-distance runners
(80). Many of the results supported the presence of a
parasympathetic overtraining syndrome (80), and the recovery
period was as long as a year (personal communication, M.
Lehmann). The primary symptom of a parasympathetic overtraining
syndrome, besides decreased performance, is a diminished
sympathetic response (i.e., epinephrine, or adrenaline) to
1690
