performance can be maximized in the short, medium, and long term
(51). As the name indicates, raise, activate and mobilize, and
potentiate are its three key phases.
The first phase of the RAMP protocol involves activities that raise
the level of key physiological parameters while also focusing on
enhancing the skill level of the athletes. While at first glance this
phase could be considered analogous to the general warm-up,
having the aim of elevating body temperature, heart rate, respiration
rate, blood flow, and joint fluid viscosity via low-intensity activities, it
is the latter focus on skill development that is very different. Here,
unlike traditional general warm-up activities, the focus is not on
generic aerobic exercises to elicit the required physiological
responses but instead to use activities that simulate the movement
patterns of the upcoming activity and develop the movement
patterns or skill patterns the athlete will need to deploy within the
sport. In this way, the session, from the outset, is specifically
targeted at key movement patterns and skill capacities that
contribute to longer term development, as well as providing for the
required physiological effects of the activity (48). This also assists in
the psychological preparation of the athlete for practice or
competition because the session constantly addresses components
that relate to performance.
The second phase, activating and mobilizing, could at first glance
be confused with the static stretching component of a traditional
warm-up. However, here again we see major differences in both the
goal of the phase and subsequently the types of activities chosen.
Here, a longer-term consideration is played out, whereby the focus is
to develop an athlete’s movement competency (48). By identifying
key movement patterns required for athletic performance in both the
subsequent session and in the athlete’s overall development, such as
squat patterns and lunge patterns, the phase can be built around
the performance of these patterns. The focus here is not on
flexibility (the range of motion around a joint) as a static
component but on mobility (48). Mobility involves the capacity to
862
