glycolysis, but if pH continues to decrease significantly it will inhibit
the rate of glycolysis.) However, the regulation of glycolysis (109) is
more specifically influenced by the concentrations and turnover rates
of three crucial glycolytic enzymes: hexokinase, PFK, and pyruvate
kinase. All three are regulatory enzymes in glycolysis, because each
has important allosteric (meaning “other site”) binding sites.
Allosteric regulation occurs when the end product of a reaction or
series of reactions feeds back to regulate the turnover rate of key
enzymes in the metabolic pathways. Consequently, this process is
also called end product regulation (87) or feedback regulation (61).
Allosteric inhibition occurs when an end product binds to the
regulatory enzyme and decreases its turnover rate and slows
product formation. In contrast, allosteric activation occurs when
an “activator” binds with the enzyme and increases its turnover rate.
Hexokinase, which catalyzes the phosphorylation of glucose to
glucose-6-phosphate, is allosterically inhibited by the concentration
of glucose-6-phosphate in the sarcoplasm (61). Thus, the higher the
concentration of glucose-6-phosphate, the more hexokinase will be
inhibited. In addition, the phosphorylation of glucose commits it to
the cell so that it cannot leave. Similarly, the PFK reaction (fructose-
6-phosphate → fructose 1,6-bisphosphate) commits the cell to
metabolizing 
glucose 
rather 
than 
storing 
it 
as 
glycogen.
Phosphofructokinase is the most important regulator of glycolysis
even though it is the slowest reaction of the steps that makes up
glycolysis because it is the bottleneck, or the rate-limiting step.
ATP is an allosteric inhibitor of PFK; therefore, as intracellular ATP
concentrations rise, PFK activity decreases and reduces the
conversion of fructose-6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
and, subsequently, decreases activity of the glycolytic pathway.
However, AMP is an allosteric activator of PFK and a powerful
stimulator of glycolysis. Moreover, the ammonia produced during
high-intensity exercise as a result of AMP or amino acid deamination
(removing the amine group from the amino acid molecule) can also
stimulate PFK. Pyruvate kinase catalyzes the conversion of
192
