Successful performance in aerobic endurance competitions
involving running, cycling, and swimming depends on athletes’ ability
to cover a fixed distance in the shortest time possible. This requires
athletes to be in peak physical and psychological condition for the
competition. To reach this level of performance, athletes must
consistently 
train 
hard, 
yet 
intelligently, 
to 
maximize 
the
physiological adaptations derived from training while avoiding injury
and overtraining. A commonly observed trend with aerobic
endurance athletes is to adopt and embrace the training practices of
highly successful or well-known athletes. Although this strategy may
be effective for a few, most aerobic endurance athletes would likely
be better served by constructing their own training regimen based
on a good working knowledge of sound training principles and an
understanding of their own individualized physical limitations and
needs. Another common belief is that greater overload via longer
duration, higher intensity, and greater frequency is required to
improve performance. However, training smarter by identifying
physiological, biomechanical, and performance strengths and
weaknesses (e.g., poor leg strength, muscle imbalances, low heat
tolerance) and working to consolidate strengths while correcting
weaknesses, has greater opportunities to improve performance
outcomes with lower risk of injuries. An extension of this principle is
applying the minimum effective dose (MED) (132, 133). MED
was originally used in the pharmaceutical industry to reflect the
understanding that there is a minimum dose of medication needed
to elicit the desired physiological response; the use of medications
results in varying side effects, and the higher the dose of
medication, the greater the side effects. In strength and
conditioning, this term has been adapted to applying the minimum
amount of training stimuli required to maximize adaptations while
simultaneously minimizing the damage and injury risks associated
with training. This concept has also been explored as the minimum
training dose needed to maintain the adaptations of resistance
training (126). In conjunction with MED, aerobic endurance coaches
1514
