A sports nutrition coach is a professional who is not a registered
dietitian but has basic training in nutrition and exercise science. For
example, the strength and conditioning professional can act as a
sports nutrition coach, providing basic nutrition education and
suggestions. More complex situations in which food or nutrition is
being used to treat or manage a medical condition (that includes a
nutrient deficiency) require medical nutrition therapy and fall under
the role of the sports dietitian. Sports nutrition coaches may obtain
additional education by getting a sports nutrition certification. For
example, the National Academy of Sports Medicine (NASM) has a
Certified Sports Nutrition Coach certification designed for personal
trainers, health coaches, group fitness instructors, and health care
professionals. Also, the International Society of Sports Nutrition
(ISSN) Sports Nutrition Specialist (SNS) Certification requires a high
school diploma for the exam and is geared toward personal trainers
or other fitness professionals who do not hold a four-year college
degree. The ISSN also has a Certified Sports Nutritionist credential
(CISSN), which requires a four-year undergraduate degree in a
related field; or be practicing in the field of sports nutrition for at
least five years; or be certified as a personal trainer by the NSCA,
ACE, or ACSM; and is intended for health, fitness, and medical
professionals who work with athletes and active individuals.
A sports nutritionist with an advanced degree is a professional
who may work in the sports nutrition industry or conduct research in
the area of sports nutrition and would therefore be able to discuss
the literature on a particular topic. The sports nutritionist with an
advanced degree may also choose to obtain a sports nutrition
certification. One option is the IOC (International Olympic
Committee) Diploma in Sports Nutrition. This two-year online
program includes coursework, seminars, tutorials, and laboratory
practical work. The IOC states that students interested in this course
typically have a degree in nutrition or dietetics, biological sciences
(including biochemistry, physiology, or sport science), or medicine.
540
