nervous pacing, fidgeting, slow reactions, and rapid eye tracking.
Cognitions 
are 
thoughts 
reported, 
negative 
worry 
about
performances or outcomes, overgeneralizing, catastrophizing, and
doubts about abilities or past failures. A brief review of cognitions
that can disrupt performances are all-or-nothing thinking, jumping to
conclusions, magnification, minimization, emotional reasoning, and
confirmation bias (5, 22).
Once these signs are observed, step 2 is to determine if the issue
is temporary or persistent. To determine what level of help is
required for an athlete, coaches need to learn how the signs and
symptoms of distress affect performance and when and how to refer
to a professional who is trained to handle psychological distress.
This third step, referral to a qualified support professional,
requires the coach to work in an individual setting with the athlete to
develop a plan to refer to a support professional, who should be
consulted or contacted ahead of time. This remains a key skill to
assist athletes with self-care for mental health and as an important
step for coaches. A performance coach or consultant is trained in
implementing psychological skills that are attention based and do
not enter into interpersonal or clinical issues. For example, a
performance coach or consultant (usually certified through the
Association of Applied Sport Psychology as a certified mental
performance consultant [CMPC]) employs goal setting, imagery, self-
talk, attentional focus, or other psychological skills to direct effort
and attention. A counselor is licensed by the state and is usually
trained to help with interpersonal, cultural, and mental health issues.
For example, if an athlete needs a counselor, interpersonal and self-
care can become a focus of cognitive behavioral treatment. Also
licensed by the state, a psychologist is trained to administer
psychological testing batteries, focusing on interpersonal and self-
care issues to work with chronic mental health issues.
The Mental Health Case Studies sidebar discusses different issues
coaches encounter and highlights the referral process. When issues
relate to performance of low motivation and effort, coaching cues
509
