traditional resistance training exercises (5, 104, 127, 146). For
example, Wallace and colleagues (146) suggest that using bands to
substitute 35% of the total load during a back squat can acutely
increase peak power by approximately 13%. Additionally, Baker and
Newton (9) suggest that the use of bands may result in a
postactivation potentiation effect within each repetition. Support for
this contention comes from the work of Stevenson and colleagues
(127), who demonstrated that the use of bands to account for 20%
of the training load resulted in an acute increase in the concentric
rate of force development when compared to a constant-loaded
condition. While these data seem to suggest that the addition of
bands to traditional resistance training methods may offer some
benefit, especially to power or rate of force development (66), some
research contests these findings (35, 115). For example, Ebben and
Jensen (35) report no differences in integrated electromyography
and mean ground reaction forces when resistance bands are used to
apply 10% of the total loading during squats.
Currently, minimal research on the use of resistance bands,
especially longitudinal studies, has been conducted to determine
whether the acute effects noted by some authors translate into
superior strength and power gains over time. However, there is
some evidence that the use of resistance bands during an off-season
strength training program performed by Division 1AA football players
induces a greater increase in upper body strength when compared
to performing traditional bench press training (44). While these data
are promising and provide some support for using bands as part of a
performance-based 
resistance 
training program, 
much 
more
research is needed to understand how these methods can be
integrated into a periodized training program.
Determining Resistance With Resistance Bands
In working with resistance bands, it is important to understand that
their composition varies depending on the type of thermoplastic or
elastomer used to produce them (88). The composition of resistance
1108
