Extensive Endurance Training
Many aerobic endurance coaches and athletes over the years have
used the term long, slow distance (LSD) or high-volume training
to reflect training for a long period of time at a slow pace. However,
this term can give the wrong impression of what an athlete is
actually trying to achieve—that is, to extend their aerobic endurance
capabilities, not just exercise slowly for a long duration. Hence, the
term extensive endurance training is a more appropriate term
and the one used in this text. Irrespective of the term used, a
common factor with extensive endurance training is that the training
distance should be greater than race distance, or the duration should
be at least as long as 30 minutes to 2 hours (98). However, as the
race distance increases, it is not practical to complete an extensive
endurance training session greater than the race distance. For
example, because of the level of fatigue and tissue damage, it is not
recommended for athletes to run 26 miles (42 km) or greater in
training before running a marathon. What the athlete relies on in
this situation is a combination of his or her extensive endurance runs
plus the accumulation of the training volume over the weeks of
training before the event. The length of an extensive endurance
session will vary according to the training status of the athlete,
where the athlete is in the program, the mode of exercise (e.g.,
cycling vs. running), as well as the duration of the aerobic endurance
event for which he or she is training. Generally, as the distance
increases from a short (e.g., 5,000 m) to a long (e.g., 26.2-mile
marathon) or ultradistance aerobic endurance event, the concept of
running the race distance or greater becomes less likely and
unnecessary. However, it also should be noted that doing greater
than the race distance at the lower end of the aerobic endurance
distances (e.g., 5,000 m, 10,000 m, or short-distance triathlons) can
be beneficial and is often undertaken.
An extensive endurance training session is typically completed at
an intensity equivalent to training zone two (refer to table 21.1 on
page 697). This intensity is typically characterized as “conversation”
1537
