•  Athletes should consider supplementing with carbohydrate before and during competition to
maintain strength and minimize muscle breakdown (47). In general, strength or speed athletes
should consume 5 to 6 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight per day during peak
training periods. As little as 30 grams of carbohydrate after training may reduce muscle breakdown.
The ideal time period for carbohydrate consumption after resistance training has yet to be fully
clarified; however, consuming carbohydrate sooner (rather than waiting) may be more beneficial,
particularly if training was carried out in a fasted state (43).
•  Because low glycogen can impair muscle force, athletes should consume higher-energy
carbohydrates immediately following weightlifting or strength and power competitions if they must
compete or train again over the course of the 24-hour period after their initial competition.
Otherwise, they can consume enough carbohydrate over the course of the day to restore glycogen
levels before the next bout of training or competition (47, 104).
•  In general, strength or speed athletes should consume 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day, even if their sport or training includes an aerobic endurance
component. After resistance training, younger individuals should consume at least 20 to 50 grams
(providing about 8.5 to 20 grams of essential amino acids) of a high-quality, high-leucine protein
(2-3 g), while older adults should consume 40 grams or more to maximally stimulate muscle
protein synthesis in the acute time period after training (109). If the exercise was performed in a
fasted state (first thing in the morning or more than 3 hours after the last protein-rich meal), the
protein should be consumed within 30 minutes after the end of the session; but if the exercise was
performed in a fed state (preexercise protein-rich meal or supplement), this postexercise time
window may be considerably longer (10).
•  Between 30 and 100 grams of high-energy carbohydrates should be consumed after muscle-
damaging exercise to reduce muscle protein breakdown (18, 43).
•  Adult athletes should eat meals containing at least 20 to 30 grams of a higher-leucine protein.
Nutrition for Hypertrophy
•  Ingestion of between 30 and 100 grams of energy-dense, moderate to high glycemic index
carbohydrates may be consumed after muscle-damaging exercise to help reduce muscle protein
breakdown (18, 43).
•  After resistance training, younger individuals should consume at least 20 to 50 grams
(providing about 8.5 to 20 grams of essential amino acids) of a high-quality, high-leucine protein
(>2-3 g), while older adults should consume 40 grams or more to maximally stimulate muscle
protein synthesis in the acute time period after training (109).
•  Adult athletes should eat meals containing at least 20 to 40 grams of a higher-leucine protein
every 3 to 4 hours.
Nutrition for Muscular Endurance
•  Maintain adequate hydration by preventing water weight losses exceeding 2% of body weight.
•  During prolonged training or competition, consider a carbohydrate-electrolyte beverage to
delay fatigue and improve performance, particularly if performing after an overnight fast (6, 142).
•  Fully replace glycogen stores before the next training session or competition.
•  Consume protein after training or games to minimize muscle damage and soreness (42).
TABLE 11.3 Sport-Specific Protein Needs
638
