to improve maximal strength (127). Similarly, aerobic power does
not appear to be improved with β-alanine supplementation (127).
Even though aerobic power is not improved, supporting data indicate
that anaerobic threshold is improved with β-alanine supplementation
(226). Practically, improving anaerobic threshold (as measured by
the lactate and ventilatory thresholds) means that endurance
activities can be performed at relatively higher intensities for longer
periods. Hill and colleagues (109) examined the effect of β-alanine
supplementation 
on 
muscle 
carnosine 
levels 
and 
exercise
performance in untrained subjects. In a double-blind fashion, 25
male subjects (19-31 yr) supplemented with either 4.0 grams β-
alanine or sugar placebo for the first week, then with up to 6.4
grams for an additional nine weeks. Muscle carnosine levels (via
muscle biopsy) and total work done (kilojoules) were measured at
weeks 0, 4, and 10 during cycling to exhaustion at maximal power
established from a graded exercise cycle ergometry test. Mean
carnosine levels increased by 58% at week 4 and an additional 15%
at week 10. Additionally, 13% and 16% increases in total work done
during cycle ergometry were seen at weeks 4 and 10, respectively.
In a comprehensive review summarizing the effects of β-alanine
supplementation 
on 
high-intensity 
performance, 
Artioli 
and
colleagues (9) stated that β-alanine ingestion is capable of improving
performance in exercises resulting in an extreme intramuscular
acidotic environment, such as multiple bouts of high-intensity
exercises lasting more than 60 seconds, as well as single bouts
undertaken when fatigue is already present. High-intensity exercises
performed with a lower level of acidosis are unlikely to benefit from
β-alanine supplementation.
Adverse Effects
In the published literature, β-alanine ingestion has ranged from 2.4
to 6.4 grams per day. In many β-alanine trials, the total daily
amount of β-alanine ingestion was divided into two to four smaller
doses. The reason for the smaller dosing strategies is to prevent the
only reported adverse effect of β-alanine supplementation, which is
708
