observed age at PHV (184); this appears to be a valid alternative for
classifying maturity status when compared to longitudinal growth
curve analysis (166). Using age, height, weight, and mid-parental
height, a child’s eventual adult height can be estimated, and their
current height can then be determined as a percentage of predicted
adult height (125). For example, a 13-year-old boy who is 165
centimeters (5 ft 5 in) tall, 60 kilograms (132 lb) in weight and
whose mother and father are 160 centimeters (5 ft 3 in) and 185
centimeters (6 ft 1 in), respectively, would be estimated at
approximately 90% of their predicted adult height. In some cases, it
may be appropriate to measure somatic growth every three months
(142). More frequent measures could be taken to create a rolling
average and a smoother growth curve; however, this is not always
feasible. For most settings, taking measurements every three
months is likely more practical. This interval should be long enough
to prevent practitioners from misinterpreting small growth changes
caused by measurement inconsistencies. However, as a child nears
their peak height velocity (PHV), it may be wise for practitioners to
measure more frequently, such as monthly. This increased frequency
is due to the rapid growth rate associated with this developmental
stage.
The adolescent growth spurt ensues approximately 88% to 95%
of predicted adult height, and longitudinal data indicate that PHV
occurs at approximately 91% to 92% of predicted adult height
(216). The risk of injury can be elevated in individuals who are
around the time of PHV, and especially those who are also
experiencing high rates of growth during this period (116, 165).
Therefore, in the earlier example of the 13-year-old, his or her
training program might need to be modified (and potentially more
frequent measures of height taken) as the child approaches PHV in
the event of disrupted coordination and control and heightened
injury risk. Alterations in center of mass, muscle imbalances, and the
relative tightening of the muscle–tendon units spanning rapidly
growing bones are potential risk factors for overuse injuries during
392
