resistance training program while supplementing with either DHEA,
androstenedione (100 mg), or a placebo for three months (219).
When DHEA supplementation (150 mg) was examined in a group of
younger males (19-29 years) on a two-weeks-on, one-week-off cycle
for eight weeks, there were no gains in strength or lean tissue (33).
Additionally, the investigators were unable to see any changes in
serum testosterone, estrone, estradiol, or lipid concentrations with
supplementation. Even in studies using higher dosages (300 mg) of
androstenedione for eight weeks, in a similar two-weeks-on, one-
week-off protocol, no significant effect was observed in strength,
muscle size, or testosterone concentrations (33). However,
androstenedione supplementation did cause an increase in serum
concentrations of estradiol and estrone and was associated with
lower high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels. These results suggest
that although performance changes may not occur in athletes taking
this supplement, they may be at higher risk for some of the negative
side effects associated with anabolic steroid use. Broeder and
colleagues (30), in the conclusion to their Andro Project study in
which they investigated the physiological and hormonal influences of
androstenedione in conjunction with a high-intensity resistance
training program, made the following statement:
Testosterone precursors do not enhance adaptations to
resistance training when consumed in dosages recommended
by manufacturers. Testosterone precursor supplementation
does result in significant increases in estrogen-related
compounds, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate concentrations,
down-regulation in testosterone synthesis, and unfavorable
alterations in blood lipid and coronary heart disease risk
profiles of men aged 35 to 65 years. (p. 3093)
Based on the scientific evidence, it appears as if prohormones fall
far short of providing the anabolic effects generally associated with
androgens (32). However, scientific research has focused almost
exclusively on only a few prohormone supplements—DHEA,
682
