they do not actually use them (19). Research has further elucidated
that elite athletes are more likely to use all forms of recovery, except
cold water immersion, than lower tiered well-trained athletes (13).
The use of or lack of use of different strategies has been found to be
related to coach and athlete awareness of the effectiveness of such
strategies (13). Further, the majority of athlete information and
recommendations about recovery strategies comes from coaches
and fellow athletes rather than peer-reviewed scientific publications
(19). Therefore, to maximize recovery, and aid performance, it is
important that coaches and athletes are educated and up to date on
the types of recovery strategies that have been shown in multiple
scientific publications to be effective, available, and best suited to
athletes in training and competition.
With regards to recovery and training, the term recovery
run/ride/swim, which is often used by aerobic endurance athletes to
reflect an easy run, ride, or swim after competition, or a training
session during the training cycle, must be clarified. Typically, a
recovery session would fall under the banner of active recovery,
which relates to low-intensity physical activities designed to facilitate
recovery from the metabolic responses of exercise fatigue (72). A
recovery session should be just that: a session with the intentional
purpose of aiding recovery beyond that achievable via passive rest,
which research indicates it does (40). It is not designed to provide
an extra training stimulus and definitely should not contribute to any
further muscle damage. Therefore, the recovery session should be
short in duration and of a low intensity (i.e., zone 1 ([table 21.1]).
Consequently, an extensive aerobic endurance session or long, slow
distance session should not be used as a recovery run, just because
it is of a low intensity. However, even though recovery sessions
should not be considered as a training stimulus, they do contribute
to the total amount of exercise completed in a training cycle and
therefore must be included in all training plans for monitoring and
recovery purposes (36).
1523
