prevent athletes from taking the supplement but instead only
substantially restricted use (115). The development of recombinant
HGH provided clinicians with a relatively low-risk drug at a lower cost
(as compared to cadaver growth hormone) with greater availability.
Clinicians can now prescribe recombinant HGH to increase stature in
short children with growth hormone deficiency and alter body
composition in adults. The use of HGH as a performance-enhancing
substance is believed to be widespread among professional athletes;
it is either taken alone or stacked with anabolic steroids (16). Even
though recombinant technology has increased the availability of
HGH, its cost, especially on the black market, is extremely high—
between several hundred and a few thousand dollars per month.
Humatrope, Nutropin, Norditropin, Genotropin, Omnitrope, Serostim,
Saizen, and Protropin are brand names of HGH commonly used in
the United States.
Efficacy
There appear to be no studies on the efficacy of HGH in professional
athletes. Most investigations of HGH have focused on HGH as
replacement therapy in growth hormone–deficient adults and
children or in healthy older individuals. These studies have
consistently shown positive alterations in body composition
(increases in lean body tissue with decreases in body fat) (66, 204).
In men with established growth hormone deficiencies, nightly
injections of recombinant HGH for six months resulted in an average
increase of 12 pounds (5.4 kg) in lean body mass and a similar
amount of fat loss (184). Most studies have not addressed the effect
of HGH therapy on muscle strength and performance. One study
showed no changes in isokinetic strength following 12 months of
therapy (112). However, the subjects in that study did not perform
any resistance training during the course of treatment. A study
involving trained adults given growth hormone (three days per week
for six weeks) showed modest changes in body composition, but no
strength assessment was performed (50). Although the scientific
691
