Mode—the score that occurs with the greatest frequency. If each numerical score appears only
once, there is no mode. If two or more scores are tied for greatest frequency, all of the similar
scores are modes. The mode is generally regarded as the least useful measure of central
tendency.
Variability The degree of dispersion of scores within a group is called variability. Two common
measures of variability are the range and the standard deviation. The range is the interval from
the lowest to the highest score. The advantage of the range is that it is easy to understand; the
disadvantage is that it uses only the two extreme scores and so may not be an accurate measure of
variability (145). For example, the range could be the same for a group of widely dispersed scores
as for a group of scores that are narrowly dispersed except for one deviant score. The standard
deviation is a measure of the variability of a set of scores about the mean. The formula for the
standard deviation of a sample is as follows:
SD=∑(x−x¯)2n−1  (14.1)
where Σ refers to a summation, x is a score, x is the mean of the scores, and n is the sample size
(number of scores). A relatively small standard deviation indicates that a set of scores is closely
clustered about the mean; a large standard deviation indicates wider dispersion of the scores about
the mean. The standard deviation is most useful when the group of scores is “normally distributed,”
forming the bell-shaped curve shown in figure 14.32 (26, 67).
The z-score can be used to express the distance of any individual score in standard deviation
(SD) units from the mean:
  z = (x − x) / SD    (14.2)
For example, if an athlete runs the 40-yard (37 m) sprint in 4.6 seconds and the mean and
standard deviation for the group tested are 5.00 and 0.33 seconds, respectively, equation 14.2 can
be applied to determine that the z-score for that athlete is −1.2. In other words, the athlete’s score
is 1.2 standard deviation units below (i.e., faster than) the group mean. Graphs can be a useful way
of representing z-scores visually. This can provide the strength and conditioning professional with a
comparison of different physical capacities and provide assistance with making decisions on which
weaknesses to target with a training program. In the example shown, the strength and conditioning
professional may decide to focus on improving endurance and flexibility while also improving body
composition (figure 14.33).
FIGURE 14.32 Normal bell curve.
823
