fatigue in slow-twitch fibers and possibly lead to better performance, by
supplementing with carbohydrate before and during competition (47).
During-Competition Food and Fluid
Recommendations
Due to large variations in sweat rates and electrolyte concentrations, athletes should measure
weight changes during training and competition in specific weather conditions and develop
individualized hydration strategies based on this information (120). During prolonged activity in hot
weather, the Institute of Medicine recommends sport drinks containing 20 to 30 mEq of sodium
(460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter,
and carbohydrate in a concentration of 5% to 10% (2).
Hydration guidance for children and adolescents consists of 5 to 9 fluid ounces (148-266 mL) of
cold water or a flavored salted beverage or sport drink depending on their weight. For example,
children or adolescents weighing 40 kilograms (88 lb) should drink 5 fluid ounces (148 mL) and
those weighing 60 kg (132 lb) should drink 9 fluid ounces (266 mL) every 20 minutes during
practice, even if they do not feel thirsty (30, 37, 106). Aerobic endurance athletes should consume
28 to 144 grams of multiple types of carbohydrates together, such as sucrose, fructose, glucose, or
maltodextrin, each hour during prolonged aerobic endurance activity (32, 34, 66, 137).
Postcompetition Nutrition
The postcompetition meal helps athletes rehydrate, replenish glycogen stores,
and repair muscle tissue. Therefore, what they consume in the time period soon
after training or competition helps optimize adaptations as well as prepare their
body for the next bout of activity. This time frame has been referred to as a
garage door of opportunity because the athlete’s body is primed to assimilate
nutrients and also because this previously assumed anabolic window is
actually much longer than was originally thought (11). Each athlete’s
postcompetition needs vary based on the sport he or she plays, intensity during
play, amount of time played, the individual’s weight and age, and probably the
person’s sex. However, much more research has been conducted with male
subjects as opposed to females; therefore, recommendations are not broken out
based on sex due to a lack of sufficient data in females.
After competition, athletes should replace fluid and electrolyte losses. If time
permits, normal meals, snacks (provided they contain some sodium), and water
will restore fluid and electrolyte losses. More salt can be added to foods when
sweat sodium losses are substantial (1, 120). Athletes can choose a
carbohydrate-electrolyte sport drink or plain water alongside foods that contain
sodium chloride (or they can salt their foods) since sodium is essential for
helping the body retain fluid (83, 120, 125). Rehydration strategies should be
individualized as much as possible. Athletes competing in weight-class sports
such as wrestling and mixed martial arts may deliberately dehydrate themselves
630
