Effect size is a statistic that can be useful for calculating group performance following a training
program or comparing between groups of athletes (42). The effect of the training program can be
calculated as the difference or change in the mean score as a proportion of the pretest standard
deviation (equation 14.3).
ES = (x posttest − x pretest) / SD pretest    (14.3)
For example, a group of athletes had a pretraining mean bench press 1RM of 104.5 kilograms
(standard deviation of 5.7 kg), and after a 12-week training intervention the mean bench press is
111.7 kilograms. The calculated effect size would be equal to (111.7 − 104.5) / 5.7 = 1.26.
Several scales have been provided to compare the magnitude of the effect (28, 103, 127), but
reference values for small (0.2), moderate (0.6), large (1.2), and very large (2.0) can be a useful
starting point for practitioners (42, 75). For the example just given, this would mean that the
strength and conditioning professional would interpret the effect size of 1.26 as meaning that the
training program had a large effect.
Developing an Athletic Profile
To determine the sport-specific training status of an athlete, the strength and conditioning
professional can combine the results of selected tests to generate an athletic profile, which is a
group of test results related to sport-specific abilities that are important for quality performance in a
sport or sport position. When evaluating athletes, the strength and conditioning professional should
follow these six steps:
1. Select tests that will measure the specific parameters most closely related to the physical
characteristics of the sport or sports in question. For example, a testing battery for wrestlers
should include tests for pulling strength, pushing strength, and local muscular endurance.
2. Choose valid and reliable tests to measure these parameters, and arrange the testing battery
in an appropriate order with sufficient rest between tests to promote test reliability (see
chapter 13 for more detail). For example, appropriate tests for wrestling might include push-
ups and sit-ups for maximum repetitions in a given time interval. These two tests should be
separated by at least 10 minutes of rest to allow recovery from fatigue and thus promote
accurate scores.
3. Administer the test battery with as many athletes as possible.
4. Determine the smallest worthwhile change for the tests and compare to normative data
where appropriate. It is recommended that coaches store testing results and develop their
own norms when standardized procedures are used.
5. Conduct repeat testing (e.g., pre- and posttraining program) and use the results to present a
visual profile with figures.
6. Use the results of the testing in some meaningful way. Ideally, the results will enable the
strength and conditioning professional to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the
athletes and to design the training program with these in mind.
825
