bioavailability and the potential for side effects such as stomach
upset (103, 157). Ferrous iron has a high bioavailability and is most
recommended; it is often paired with vitamin C, which enhances iron
absorption (157). It is recommended to take iron supplements on an
empty stomach, at least an hour before meals, because many foods,
drinks, and other dietary supplements can interfere with iron
absorption. For example, whole grains, coffee, black tea, red wine,
and hot chocolate can impair iron absorption. Additionally, both
calcium and supplemental magnesium may interfere with iron
absorption (169). Because of the many factors affecting iron intake
and absorption, including intake of other minerals the athlete may
not be consuming in adequate quantities, only a medical doctor or
registered dietitian should recommend iron supplements and how to
take an iron supplement for maximum absorption and minimal
stomach upset (157).
Calcium
Adequate calcium intake throughout childhood and adolescence is
essential for the development of strong bones. Calcium helps bones
grow in length and density during adolescence, with up to 90% of
peak bone mineral density occurring during late adolescence (61). In
adults, calcium helps maintain bone density. When dietary calcium
intake falls short, calcium is pulled from its storage site in bone to
meet the demands of the body and keep calcium concentrations in
the blood, muscle, and intercellular fluids constant. Calcium is
essential for attaining peak bone mass, and calcium deficiencies can
impair the attainment of peak bone mineral density and increase risk
of fracture later in life (109). Calcium also keeps teeth strong, helps
regulate muscle contraction, and plays a role in nerve functioning,
blood vessel expansion and contraction, and hormone and enzyme
secretion (109).
The NHANES found that just 15% of 9- to 13-year-old females
and less than 10% of females aged 14 to 18 and over the age of 51
met the adequate intake (AI) for calcium from diet alone (11).
588
