dominated players are more comfortable in situations in which it is
either very easy to achieve success (thereby avoiding shame) or so
extremely difficult that there would be no expectation of winning
(again, eliminating the likelihood of feeling shame) (64). At higher
levels of sport involvement, it is unlikely that athletes would be
dominated by MAF, but they would certainly show degrees or a
range of competitiveness. Confronted by a very challenging goal,
such as gaining a significant amount of lean muscle weight during
the hypertrophy phase of a periodized cycle, the MAF-dominated
individual might reduce effort because he or she fears failure and the
threat to self-esteem (and might also claim that the goal is
unrealistic), whereas the MAS-dominated individual might heighten
effort in response to the challenge and not perceive any threat.
Motivational Aspects of Skill Learning
(Self-Controlled Practice)
In addition to providing the individual with information for skill
acquisition, practice, instructions, and feedback can also act as
motivational factors for enhancing performance. Practice schedules
that address the fundamental psychological needs of autonomy,
competence, and social relatedness can influence motivation (73). Of
interest in the motor learning literature is the role of self-
controlled practice in enhancing motivation, performance, and
skill learning. Self-controlled practice involves the athlete in decisions
related to the practice structure, including when to receive feedback
or which skill to practice; it also involves simply asking athletes how
they believe they are doing (10, 11, 12, 73). This promotes a more
active involvement in the practice session and can enhance feelings
of competence and autonomy (11, 12). As a result of this
heightened motivation, performance and learning improve (11, 12).
Engaging the athletes in some decisions related to the practice
schedule is an easy yet effective way to allow them autonomy and
ownership in reaching their sport performance goals. The concepts
484
