diabetes, insulin resistance, other diseases, and medical concerns), diet history,
and food preferences while providing all of the nutrients an athlete needs to train
and perform optimally. Additionally, research shows that ongoing behavior
therapy and support can improve long-lasting results (80).
Overweight and Obesity
Overweight and obesity, both of which reflect an accumulation of excess body
fat, increase a person’s risk of morbidity from hypertension; dyslipidemia;
coronary artery disease; gallbladder disease; stroke; type 2 diabetes; sleep
apnea; osteoarthritis; respiratory problems; and endometrial, breast, prostate,
and colon cancers (92). Obesity is categorized as a disease and affects 34.9% of
adults and 17% of children in the United States (96). At a population level,
overweight and obesity are typically classified based on a body mass index
(BMI) of 25 to 29.9 kg/m2 and ≥30 kg/m2, respectively (table 11.5). However,
this evaluative approach may have very little applicability to athletes. In reality,
BMI is a measure of excess weight as opposed to excess body fat (92) because it
cannot distinguish between excess fat and muscle or bone mass (26). Therefore,
BMI can overestimate body fat in athletes and others with muscular builds and
underestimate body fat in older persons or those who have lost muscle mass
(95). Finally, age, sex, ethnicity, and muscle mass affect the association between
BMI and body fat. Strength and conditioning professionals should use other more
accurate measures of body composition such as skinfolds, air displacement
plethysmography (ADP), multifrequency bioelectrical impedance analysis, or
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) in athletes with more muscle than
their age- and sex-matched counterparts (74).
The causes of obesity are complex and include an interaction of genes and
environment, involving social, behavioral, cultural, metabolic, physiological, and
genetic factors. However, many treatment options are effective, including dietary
therapy, altering physical activity patterns, behavior therapy techniques,
pharmacotherapy, and surgery. Some patients and clinicians employ a
combination of these treatments. The initial goal for weight loss in overweight
and obese individuals should be 10% of initial weight within six months (92).
Additionally, target body weight can be calculated using body fat percentage
and FFM (i.e., target body weight = fat free mass/[100 percent desired percent
body fat]). Where desired, percent body fat is based on measurement type (e.g.,
ADP, DXA, skinfolds) and team, sport, and position-specific normative body
composition data.
Low-Carbohydrate Diets
646
