Step 5: Training Load and Repetitions
Load most simply refers to the amount of weight assigned to an exercise set
and is often characterized as the most critical aspect of a resistance training
program (50, 106, 162, 163).
Terminology Used to Quantify and Qualify
Mechanical Work
Mechanical work can be defined as the product of force and displacement
(sometimes referred to as distance). An athlete can perform (external)
mechanical work via demands made on the body to generate (internal)
metabolic energy. Thus, it is important to quantify the amount of mechanical
work or degree of metabolic demand to plan variation in the training program
and to avoid the exhaustion phase of Selye’s General Adaptation Syndrome
associated with overtraining (33, 148).
A quantity measure for resistance training work is needed. Traditionally, at
least in the sport of weightlifting, this work is called the load, and one can
calculate it by multiplying each weight lifted by the number of times it is lifted
and summing all such values over a training session. Volume–load is a proxy
for work, because displacement and force production are not measured in
applied settings. However, volume–load (90) is a better term than just load. This
quantity is related to mechanical work and the associated metabolic energy
demands and physiological stress and is distinguished from repetition-volume
(i.e., the total number of repetitions; see Step 6: Volume for more explanation).
Volume–load should be considered as system mass volume–load in the
calculation of resistance training in which the athlete or a mass is moved (e.g.,
loaded jump squats). For example, an 80-kilogram athlete with a 40-kilogram
jump squat load for 4 sets of 3 is doing 120 kilograms × 12, or 1,440 kilograms.
In contrast, when the athlete’s mass is not being lifted (e.g., bench press or
shoulder press), only the external load should be included in the volume–load
calculation. Volume–load approaches are also useful in quantifying the nature of
the total resistance training load, by separating the volume–load from core and
assistance exercises or delineating between hypertrophy, maximal strength, and
power training. In this way, the strength and conditioning professional can plan
or determine not just the total volume–load for the session but also what
stimulus is achieved primarily from the session.
The typical calculation of volume–load (i.e., sets × repetitions × load) does
not account for the distance that external load is traveling. Given that athletes
possess unique anthropometric characteristics (e.g., height and arm length), the
1222
