Adverse Effects
While medically supervised use of EPO provides therapeutic benefit
in the treatment of anemia related to kidney disease, its misuse can
lead to serious health risks for athletes who use this substance
simply to gain a competitive edge. The increase in hematocrit
resulting from EPO injection presents a significant health risk.
Increases in red blood cell number increase blood viscosity (the
thickening of the blood). This poses several problems that include
increased risk of blood clotting, elevations in systolic blood pressure
and accentuation of the exercise pressor response stroke, and
cerebral or pulmonary embolism (22, 42, 82). During aerobic
endurance events, the additional problem of dehydration could
compound cardiovascular risks by eliminating any safety margin in
the balance between performance advantages from artificially
increased hematocrit and decrements from increased blood viscosity.
Several studies have noted marked accentuation of the blood
pressure response during exercise following EPO administration. The
deaths of a number of competitive cyclists have been related to EPO
administration (82). The primary risk associated with EPO is its lack
of predictability compared to red blood cell infusion. Once EPO is
injected into the body, the stimulus for producing red blood cells is
no longer under control. Consequently, aerobic endurance athletes
should avoid this drug because of the significant cardiovascular risk,
leading to possible death, associated with its administration.
β-Adrenergic Agonists
Synthetic β-adrenergic agonists, or β-agonists, are substances
chemically related to epinephrine, a hormone produced in the
adrenal medulla that regulates physiological effects, such as
lipolysis (the breakdown of fat) and thermogenesis (increased
energy expenditure resulting in the production of heat). β-Agonists
were originally developed for the treatment of asthma and other life-
threatening medical conditions. Some of these compounds have
been found to have specific effects on body composition, such as
695
