Vitamin
Function
Food sources
(Oregon State
University)
DRI and ULb per
day
aAntioxidants are substances that modify cell-signaling pathways and counteract oxidative
stress-induced cell damage caused by reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (free radicals).
Free radicals are both beneficial and harmful to human health. An overproduction of, or
overexposure to, free radicals combined with a deficiency in antioxidants can result in
oxidative stress and subsequent damage to cellular lipids, proteins, and DNA (71, 166).
bDietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the values
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR), and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the general population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the life span for each sex. DRI and UL values from (71-74).
Data from National Institutes of Health.
Water-soluble vitamins, including the B vitamins and vitamin C,
dissolve in water and are transported in the blood. With the
exception of vitamin B12, which is stored in the liver for years, water-
soluble vitamins are not stored in appreciable amounts in the body;
instead the body uses what is needed and then excretes the
remaining amounts in urine (165). Though there are no known side
effects from excess vitamin B12 consumption, consuming more than
the body can use will not increase energy or improve health (18,
74). Vitamins A, D, E, and K are fat soluble and therefore carried by
fat in the blood and stored in fat tissue in the body (109). Excess
preformed vitamin A (not beta carotene, alpha carotene, or beta
cryptoxanthin, which are converted into vitamin A in the body) is
toxic and associated with significant adverse effects including liver
damage, intracranial pressure (pseudotumor cerebri), dizziness,
nausea, headaches, skin irritation, pain in joints and bones, coma,
and even death (23). Excess vitamin A intake can occur through diet
but typically results from high levels of vitamin A in supplements (72,
109). Toxic levels of vitamin D can lead to heart arrhythmias and
increased levels of blood calcium, which can cause blood vessel and
tissue calcification, as well as damage to the heart, blood vessels,
and kidneys (109). Vitamin E acts as an anticoagulant and therefore
579
