sometimes adjusted through a mechanism that alters the normal
force that keeps the friction surfaces in contact with each other.
A weighted sled used in training for football or track is an example
of a device that is resisted by both friction and inertia. The
resistance due to the sled’s inertia is directly proportional to both the
sled’s mass and its acceleration. The resistance due to the friction
between the sled’s runners and the ground is proportional to both
the friction coefficient between surfaces in contact and the net force
(which is the normal force in this example) pressing the sled against
the ground, which equals the gravitational force minus any upward
force exerted by the individual pushing the sled. Mass can be added
to the sled to increase the gravitational force. The friction coefficient
varies with the surface on which the sled rests (e.g., sand, bare soil,
dry grass, wet grass) and the sled’s runners. Thus, for outdoor
training, such devices do not provide consistently repeatable
resistance. They are nevertheless useful in providing horizontal
resistance, which cannot be directly provided by weights. It takes
more force to get the sled moving than to keep it moving, because
the coefficient of static friction is always greater than the coefficient
of sliding friction. Once the sled is moving, the coefficient of sliding
friction stays relatively constant. Therefore, one should understand
that if velocity is kept relatively consistent during sled pulling and
pushing, friction resistance will be relatively consistent too. This will
be dictated by a combination of the athlete’s capacity to apply
consistent impulse (F × t) at the foot–ground interface and maintain
posture sufficient to effectively transfer this to the sled.
Fluid Resistance
The resistive force encountered by an object moving through a fluid
(liquid or gas), or by a fluid moving past or around an object or
through an opening, is called fluid resistance. Fluid resistance is a
significant factor in such sport activities as swimming, rowing, golf,
sprinting, discus throwing, and baseball pitching. (Except for
swimming and rowing, in which the fluid is water, all these involve
157
