a Pearson product–moment correlation coefficient based on the
scores on a new body fat assessment device and those from dual-
energy X-ray absorptiometry would provide a measure of the
concurrent validity of the new test.
Predictive validity is the extent to which the test score
corresponds with future behavior or performance. This can be
measured through comparison of a test score with some measure of
success in the sport itself. For example, one could calculate the
statistical correlation between the overall score on a battery of tests
used to assess potential for basketball and a measurement of actual
basketball performance as indicated by a composite of such
quantities as points scored, rebounds, assists, blocked shots, forced
turnovers, and steals.
Reliability
Reliability is a measure of the degree of consistency or
repeatability of a test (2, 8). If an athlete whose ability does not
change is measured two times and achieves the same score, the test
is perfectly reliable. With an unreliable test, an individual could
obtain a high score on one day and a low score on another. A test
must be reliable to be valid, because highly variable results have
little meaning. However, even a reliable test may not be valid,
because the test may not measure what it is supposed to measure.
For example, both the 60-meter (66 yard) sprint and the 1.5-mile
(2.4 km) run are reliable field tests, but only the 1.5-mile run is
considered a valid field test for aerobic fitness. It is also possible for
a test to be highly reliable for one group (e.g., college tennis
players) but only moderately reliable for another group (e.g., grade
school tennis players) because of differences in physical or emotional
maturity and skill level, which can affect test performance.
There are several ways to determine the reliability of a test; the
most obvious one is to administer the same test several times to the
same group of athletes. Statistical correlation, such as the
intraclass-correlation coefficient, of the scores from two test
739
