Population
and age
range
Estimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fita
Fruitb Vegetablesc
Grainsd
Protein
foodse
Dairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
The amount needed from each group depends on age, sex, height, weight, and level of
physical activity. The amount can also depend on whether the individual is pregnant or
breastfeeding. General recommendations by age are shown in the chart.
aThese amounts are appropriate for individuals who get less than 30 minutes of moderate
physical activity most days. Those who are more physically active may be able to consume
more while staying within the daily caloric need. To find an individual’s daily caloric need,
go to www.myplate.gov/myplate-plan.
bSee table 10.2 for MyPlate Cup of Fruit Table.
cSee table 10.3 for MyPlate Cup of Vegetables Table.
dSee table 10.4 for MyPlate Ounce-Equivalent of Grains Table.
eSee table 10.5 for MyPlate Ounce-Equivalent of Proteins Table.
fSee table 10.6 for MyPlate Cup of Dairy Table.
Fruit. In general, 1 cup of fruit or 100% fruit juice or 1/2 cup of dried fruit can be
considered as 1 cup from the Fruit Group.
Vegetables. Any vegetable or 100% vegetable juice counts as a member of the Vegetable
Group. Vegetables may be raw or cooked; fresh, frozen, canned, or dried-dehydrated; and
may be whole, cut up, or mashed. Vegetables in their nutrient-dense forms have limited
additions such as salt, butter, or creamy sauces.
Grains. Any food made from wheat, rice, oats, cornmeal, barley, or another cereal grain is a
grain product. Bread, pasta, breakfast cereals, tortillas, and grits are examples of grain
products. Foods such as popcorn, rice, and oatmeal are included in the grains group. Half
of one’s grains should be whole grains. Whole grains have the entire kernel, which includes
the bran, germ, and endosperm. Some whole grain examples are whole-wheat flour, bulgur,
oatmeal, and brown rice.
Protein foods. All foods made from meat, poultry, seafood, beans and peas, eggs,
processed soy products, nuts, and seeds are considered part of the Protein Foods Group.
Beans and peas are also part of the Vegetable Group. In general, 1 ounce of meat, poultry,
or fish; 1/4 cup cooked beans; 1 egg; 1 tablespoon of peanut butter; 1/2 ounce of nuts or
seeds; 1/4 cup (about 2 oz) of tofu; or 1 ounce of tempeh, cooked, can be considered as 1
ounce-equivalent from the Protein Foods Group. Many Americans get the right amount of
protein needed from meat, poultry, and eggs but do not meet the recommendations for
seafood or nuts, seeds, and soy products. Meeting this can help increase the amount of
important nutrients the body needs, like unsaturated fats, dietary fiber, and vitamin D.
604
