suggested that when recommended levels of protein are consumed,
the effect of protein timing appears to be, at best, minimal; total
daily protein intake is the most important factor in promoting
exercise-induced muscle growth (5, 140). While nutrient timing of
protein potentially can be a beneficial strategy for enhancing muscle
protein synthesis, the effects on muscle hypertrophy ultimately
depend on the timing of the preworkout protein meal; the closer the
meal is to the training session, the less need for immediate
postworkout protein intake (140). To maximize muscle growth,
consume high-quality protein (at a dose of approximately 0.4 to 0.5
g of protein per kg of lean body mass) both before and after
exercise within about 4 to 6 hours of each other, depending on meal
size (140). Athletes with high body masses may struggle to consume
enough protein to meet required daily needs. Therefore, it is
recommended that these athletes consume high-quality protein
immediately to 2 hours after exercise (86). Ingesting 20 to 40 grams
of high-quality protein every 3 to 4 hours throughout the day
appears to most favorably affect muscle protein synthesis and is
associated with improved body composition and performance
outcomes, particularly in strength athletes (86). Aerobic endurance
athletes may benefit from the addition of high-quality protein during
endurance exercise in addition to their regular carbohydrate intake
to suppress muscle damage and improve feelings of soreness (76).
Concerns surrounding protein intakes above the RDA are
unfounded for the most part in healthy individuals (105). Proteins
consumed in excess of the amount needed for the synthesis of
tissue are broken down (103), the nitrogen is excreted as urea in
urine, and the remaining ketoacids are either used directly as
sources of energy or converted to carbohydrate (gluconeogenesis)
or body fat (64). In fact, a study examining high protein intake in
athletes found that protein intakes up to 2.8 grams per kilogram
body weight (as assessed by a seven-day diet record) did not impair
any measures of renal function (130). The strength and conditioning
professional should be aware that consistently high protein intakes,
555
