Fluid and Electrolytes
Water is the largest component of the body, representing 45% to
75% of a person’s body weight (75). In the human body, water acts
as a lubricant, shock absorber, building material, and solvent.
Additionally, water is essential for body temperature regulation
(water loss through sweat helps cool off skin, particularly in hot
environments and during exercise), nutrient transport and waste
product removal, and maintaining fluid balance and therefore normal
blood pressure (81). Water is so important that even under optimal
temperature conditions, the body can survive only a few days
without water.
While maintaining adequate hydration is important for all
individuals, athletes must pay close attention to their hydration
status since sweat losses that exceed fluid intake can quickly lead to
a hypohydrated state with a subsequent increase in core body
temperature, decrease in blood plasma volume, and increase in
heart rate and perceived exertion (32, 139). When this happens,
sweat output cannot keep up with increases in core body
temperature unless fluids are given. Repeated exercise in hot
environments helps the body adapt to heat stress (e.g., greater
sweat volume, lower electrolyte concentration of sweat, and lower
temperature for the onset of sweating), and therefore athletes may
be more prone to dehydration and heat stress at the beginning of
the season (54). In addition, athletes with less training may be more
prone to heat stress than trained athletes (32). Due to physiological
changes that alter water conservation in the body as well as age-
related decline in fluid intake, the elderly have an increased risk of
dehydration and hypohydration (32). Children may have a greater
risk of dehydration as well, resulting from increased heat gain from
the environment due to greater surface area–body mass ratio
compared to adults, increased heat production during exercise,
decreased ability to dissipate heat through sweat, and a decreased
sensation of thirst compared to adults (12, 46). Additionally, those
590
