per kilogram body weight after every 15 minutes (for a total of 52 g of
carbohydrate per hour) during a 90-minute intermittent shuttle test (6).
Consuming the carbohydrate-electrolyte beverage attenuated a significant
decrease in skill reduction from before exercise until the last 15 to 30 minutes of
exercise compared to placebo. In the carbohydrate trial, there was a 3%
reduction in skill performance during this time period, while in the placebo trial a
15% decline in skill performance was noted. However, this trial was performed
after carbohydrate-depleting exercise followed by a low-carbohydrate meal and
then an overnight fast; therefore, the effect of carbohydrates on performance
may depend not only on the amount consumed during intermittent activities but
also on whether the athlete is competing in a fed or fasted and glycogen-
depleted state (6).
In another study, which used four 15-minute quarters of intermittent high-
intensity shuttles at various intensities (walking, jogging, running, sprinting, and
jumping), separated by a 20-minute rest at halftime and followed by a shuttle
run to fatigue (designed to mimic a competitive soccer or basketball game),
subjects who consumed a carbohydrate-electrolyte (carbohydrate) drink
before exercise (5 mL of a 6% solution per kilogram body weight) and at
halftime (5 mL of a 18% solution per kilogram body weight) ran 37% longer in
the run to fatigue than those receiving a placebo and were significantly faster in
a 20 meter (22 yd) sprint during the fourth quarter. In addition, the
carbohydrate-supplemented group performed better on a total body motor skill
test during the later stages of exercise and reported decreased perceptions of
fatigue, indicating that the consumption of a carbohydrate-electrolyte beverage
during intermittent sports is advantageous (145).
Strength and Power Sports
Carbohydrates are also an essential source of energy used during resistance
training and therefore in strength and power sports. Research studies using a
series of different weightlifting protocols found that participants used a
significant amount of muscle glycogen (78), though this is notably lower than
what is typically seen for power–endurance or intermittent high-intensity sports.
Most of these studies had participants perform just a few sets of exercises.
Therefore, athletes who perform in strength and power competitions or sports,
or in positions that rely on muscle strength and power (e.g., hammer throwers
and offensive linemen in American football), could deplete their muscle glycogen
stores to a level that affects performance. Furthermore, starting with already low
carbohydrate stores will increase muscle breakdown (76). Strength and power
athletes can maintain their glycogen stores, which may decrease muscular
629
