Feeding and Eating Disorders
Eating disorders, including binge-eating disorder, anorexia nervosa, and
bulimia nervosa, are serious mental health disorders that can affect both men
and women, appear at any point in life, and increase risk of mortality. Those with
eating disorders have a high prevalence of other psychiatric disorders, including
anxiety disorders, mood disorders such as depression, impulse-control disorders,
and substance abuse disorders (49, 58).
Studies show an increased prevalence of both disordered eating and
eating disorders in athletes compared to controls (45, 128, 151). In particular,
athletes in sports with weight classes such as wrestling, those in sports that
emphasize leanness such as cross country running, and aesthetic sports such as
gymnastics may be more prone to disordered eating and eating disorders (45,
128, 151). Signs of disordered eating may include restrictive eating; fasting;
skipping meals; and taking diet pills, laxatives, or diuretics. However, those with
disordered eating do not meet the full diagnostic criteria for an eating disorder
(45).
Eating disorders are multifactorial diseases and, as such, require a
multidisciplinary team approach. The strength and conditioning professional must
be aware of signs and symptoms of an eating disorder and have a referral
network in place so athletes can get the psychological, medical, and nutrition
help they need from experts who work with eating disorders.
Anorexia Nervosa
Anorexia nervosa is characterized by a distorted body image and an intense fear
of gaining weight or becoming fat, leading those with this disease to excessive
calorie restriction and severe weight loss (8). Those with anorexia nervosa also
put a great deal of emphasis on their weight or shape yet do not recognize the
seriousness of their illness. Also, people with anorexia nervosa typically engage
in ritualistic behaviors including repeated weighing, cutting food into small
pieces, and carefully portioning their food (92).
Two subtypes fall under anorexia nervosa. The restricting type does not
regularly binge eat or purge, while the binge-eating or purging type regularly
engages in binge eating or purging.
The incidence peaks in the early 20s for both males and females, and the
lifetime prevalence in females ages 10 to 39 years ranges from 0.21% to 0.89%,
and in males ages 10 to 39 years it ranges from 0.19% to 0.67% (143).
Estimates based on data modeling reveal that 14% of females with anorexia
nervosa and 28.2% of males seek treatment (143). It is important to note that
among all mental health disorders, anorexia nervosa has the highest mortality
652
