Type
Description
Upper body
anchored
Lying supine, holding a fixed object or a partner’s legs, while the lower body
is free to move. Movements can be progressed by incorporating or
increasing external resistance, movement velocity, or plane of motion (e.g.,
increased transverse plane involvement is more complex than sagittal plane
only).
Throws
Forcefully projecting a medicine ball or other external weight in a specified
direction. The mass of the implement will influence the resultant movement
velocity and should be considered in respect to the mass–velocity–
momentum equation and the force production capability of the athlete.
Exercises for the trunk may be performed ballistically provided
that movement modifications are made. Specifically, the exercise
movement must be shorter and quicker to allow stimulation and use
of the stretch reflex. The relatively large range of motion and the
time needed to complete the movement do not permit reflexive
potentiation of the abdominal muscles. The exercises can be
modified to decrease both the range of motion and time, thereby
allowing the agonist muscles to be potentiated.
Intensity
Plyometric intensity refers to the stress placed on muscles,
connective tissues, and joints during an exercise. It is primarily
determined by the type of drill performed, technique used, and
arrangement of equipment. Additionally, it is important to consider
the complexity of the movement when assessing intensity. For
example, multiple hurdle hops in a straight line can involve higher
linear speeds at a relatively lower intensity. However, if the same
hurdles are arranged in a square that requires the athlete to change
direction with each hop, the intensity will be significantly higher. This
increase in intensity occurs because athletes must decelerate their
momentum before each direction change. They must then use the
plyometric response to propel themselves in a new direction. As a
result, both the intensity of the drill and the ground contact time can
increase substantially when directional changes are incorporated.
1274
