To promote program specificity, particular load and repetition assignments are
indicated for athletes training for single-effort power events (e.g., shot put, high
jump, weightlifting) and for multiple-effort power events (e.g., basketball and
volleyball). For example, single-effort-event athletes may be assigned sets of 1
or 2 repetitions using loads that equal 80% to 90% of the 1RM, especially on
heavy training days. For sports with multiple maximum-power efforts (e.g., the
frequent maximum vertical jumping motions of a volleyball blocker), 3 to 5
repetitions per set with loads at 75% to 85% of the 1RM may be most
appropriate. However, strength and conditioning professionals should consider
the training season that the athlete is currently in to ensure that fatigue is being
appropriately managed.
On the basis of the %1RM–repetition relationships shown in table 18.8 (page
544), the strength and conditioning professional may question the load
assignments for power training in table 18.11. The %1RM loads may appear to
be too low compared to the goal number of repetitions. For example, according
to table 18.8, 3 to 5 repetitions are typically associated with loads 93% to 87%
of the 1RM, not 75% to 85% of the 1RM or less as table 18.11 indicates. Power
exercises cannot be maximally loaded at any repetition scheme, because the
quality of the movement technique will decline before momentary muscle fatigue
defines a true xRM set (71). Therefore, lighter loads allow the athlete to
complete repetitions with maximum speed to promote maximum power
development. For example, power exercises are usually limited to 5 repetitions
per set, but with loads up to and equal to a 10RM (i.e., approximately 75% of
the 1RM). This load adjustment to promote peak power output also applies to
the RM continuum (figure 18.10, page 551). Power training can be emphasized
across the range of 5 repetitions or fewer, but the strength and conditioning
professional should realize that these loads are not true RMs. However, exercises
with a smaller displacement (e.g., countermovement shrug and hang pull) may
allow the performance of at least 6 repetitions with supramaximal loads (>100%
1RM power clean) without decreases in force production characteristics or
changes in technique across repetitions (113, 114).
Variation of the Training Load
Training for muscular strength and power places a high physiological stress on
an athlete’s body. Intermediate and advanced resistance-trained athletes are
accustomed to lifting heavy loads and possess the experience and motivation to
exert to near failure during every set, but this should not always be the goal.
Despite the high training status, this degree of training demand typically cannot
be tolerated very long without contributing to an overtrained state (176). For
example, an athlete may resistance train three days a week with muscular
1240
