calculated include peak power, average power, and a fatigue index such as a ratio of maximum to
minimum interval power. Norms for cycle ergometer tests are available (71, 103).
Load-Velocity Profile
Velocity-based training (VBT) using commercially available technology has become an increasingly
popular method for measuring bar speed and displacement during the performance of individual
resistance training exercises. These technologies allow testers to measure the intensity of an
exercise using bar velocity as a metric rather than simply using percentages of a 1RM (15, 156).
These methods are based on the inverse relationship between bar speed and the weight lifted.
Specifically, as the absolute weight on the bar increases, a linear decrease in bar velocity is typically
recorded. Using this knowledge, strength and conditioning professionals can create an
individualized load–velocity profile by performing a series of sets performed with progressively
increasing loads (i.e., 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 90% of 1RM) (156). The creation of the load–
velocity profile has been suggested to be useful for evaluating and prescribing exercise intensity
during resistance training programs and has also been suggested to be a useful tool for estimating
or monitoring the 1RM. When the load–velocity profile is created from a series of increasing loads
as a percentage of the 1RM with the back squat exercise (figure 14.1) a linear relationship exists
between load and velocity (14). However, when the 1RM back squat is estimated from the load–
velocity profile, it is highly variable and consistently results in an overestimation of the athlete’s
1RM and should not be used for 1RM prediction (56, 89). When the current body of scientific
knowledge is examined using the load–velocity profile to predict the 1RM on a day-to-day basis, it
may result in the misprogramming of training loads and, in some instances, the programming of
loads that exceed the athlete’s capacities (14, 56, 60). As such, it is generally recommended that
the 1RM should be directly tested when seeking to determine an athlete’s maximal strength in a
given exercise, and the load–velocity profile should not be used to estimate the 1RM (56, 89).
Anaerobic Capacity
Anaerobic capacity is the maximal rate of energy production by the combined phosphagen and
anaerobic glycolytic energy systems for moderate-duration activities. It is typically quantified as the
maximal power output during muscular activity between 30 and 90 seconds using a variety of tests
for the upper and lower body (39, 103, 124, 151), as opposed to maximal anaerobic power tests,
which last no longer than a few seconds.
Local Muscular Endurance
Local muscular endurance is the ability of certain muscles or muscle groups to perform repeated
contractions against a submaximal resistance (18, 103). A test of local muscular endurance should
be performed in a continuous manner for several seconds to several minutes without the advantage
of rest periods and without extraneous body movements. Examples include performing a maximal
number of repetitions of the chin-up, parallel bar dip, or push-up exercises or a resistance training
exercise using a fixed load (e.g., a percentage of an athlete’s 1RM or body weight) (38, 46, 94, 100,
103).
Aerobic Capacity
Aerobic capacity, also called aerobic power, is the maximum rate at which an athlete can
produce energy through oxidation of energy sources (carbohydrates, fats, and proteins) and is
usually expressed as a volume of oxygen consumed per kilogram of body weight per minute (i.e.,
mL · kg−1 · min−١) (95). Few strength and conditioning professionals have the equipment to
measure oxygen consumption directly, so aerobic capacity is generally estimated by performance in
aerobic endurance activities such as running 1 mile (1.6 km) or more (69, 111, 120). It can also be
767
