Conclusion
Speed, change of direction, and agility are well-established measures
of athletic prowess in most sporting contexts. For this reason,
strength and conditioning professionals should be aware of how
these abilities are established and modified through training plan
design and execution. These components of athletic movement and
game play are underpinned by task-specific force application. This
task-specific force production must be large enough to stabilize the
athlete’s body weight in the presence of gravity, displace the athlete
from one point to another, and continue moving the athlete at high
velocities.
Running speed is associated with the relationship between step
length and rate. Sprinting is a near-maximum to maximum run that
is defined by large rates of force developed within a short stance
time. Better sprinters spend more time in the air as a result of
increased step lengths that occur at faster rates than those of their
slower counterparts and are better able to produce larger net forces
that are oriented optimally for effective acceleration and top speed.
Agility encompasses the skills and abilities needed to explosively
change movement direction, velocities, or modes in response to a
stimulus. Both sprinting and agility use the SSC and greater
neuromuscular efficiency compared to slower movements. However,
agility includes perceptual-cognitive demands such as visual search
scanning, decision making, anticipation, and reaction times that
make it a separate training quality.
Strength and conditioning professionals aiming to improve these
performance attributes should do so through the cyclic and
sequential arrangement of training phases that harmonize strength
training with speed, agility, or COD practice or some combination of
these. This training effect may best result from the incorporation of
exercises that are task specific and promote proper movement
mechanics. The training prescribed should reflect the results of a
needs analysis assessment at the beginning of a long phase or year.
1483
