milligrams of caffeine per kilogram body mass. The exercise bout
consisted of 3 sets of 70% 1RM bench press conducted to failure on
each set with 1 minute of rest between each set. The energy drink
significantly increased bench press performance as compared to the
placebo treatment. Other studies investigating the effects of
preworkout 
energy 
drink 
consumption 
have 
also 
reported
improvements in upper and lower body total lifting volume (54, 86).
While it appears that preworkout energy drink ingestion is effective
for increasing resistance training volume performance, other types of
anaerobic exercise (including Wingate tests and speed or agility
performance) are not as responsive to energy drink consumption
(70, 114). In terms of aerobic endurance exercise performance,
some investigations (122), but not all (36), have reported that
energy drinks containing approximately 2 milligrams of caffeine per
kilogram body mass, consumed within an hour before exercise,
improve cycling and running performance in trained cyclists and
recreationally active individuals (123). Interestingly, the amount of
caffeine (2 mg/kg body mass) in the energy drinks is less than the
amount recommended for an enhancement of exercise performance
(3-9 mg/kg body mass). This contributes to the hypothesis that the
synergistic effects of the various ingredients in energy drinks may be
responsible for the reported improvements in exercise performance
(123).
Adverse Effects
The safety issues surrounding energy drink consumption appear
related to excessive caffeine intake (187) and the detrimental effects
of mixing energy drinks with alcohol (187). The mixing of energy
drinks with alcohol is more prevalent in certain social contexts and is
not a common practice for those consuming energy drinks before a
workout to enhance work capacity or to facilitate faster training
adaptations. Due to the presence of caffeine in most energy drinks,
the same potential adverse effects that exist for caffeine also exist
for energy drinks. However, most energy drinks contain only
moderate amounts of caffeine, typically less than 300 milligrams
722
