Amount of carbohydrate
Sample meal plan for a 68 kg (150 lb)
athlete
Nutrition breakdown
cooked basmati rice, 1.8 oz [51 g]
steamed broccoli
Note: These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes. Macronutrient calculations are
approximate.
Fluid intake guidelines are different for children. According to the American
Academy of Pediatrics, children weighing 40 kg (88 pounds) should drink 5 fluid
ounces (148 mL) of cold water or a flavored salted beverage every 20 minutes
during practice, while adolescents weighing 60 kg (132 pounds) should drink 9
fluid ounces (266 mL) every 20 minutes even if they do not feel thirsty. They
also recommend a sodium chloride concentration of 15 to 20 mmol/L
(approximately 1 g per liter), which has been shown to increase voluntary
hydration by 90% when compared to unflavored water (30, 106, 147). Despite
these recommendations, keep in mind that 9 ounces of fluid at one time is a
considerable amount for an adolescent and may cause stomach distress.
Therefore, these guidelines may need to be adjusted for individual athletes,
depending on size and sweat rates.
Aerobic Endurance Sports
Consuming carbohydrates during prolonged aerobic endurance exercise can
improve performance while also reducing exercise-induced stress and
suppression of immune system functioning (95). And though sport drinks provide
carbohydrates, they cannot keep up with an athlete’s carbohydrate use during
prolonged, intense activity (unless an excessive amount of fluid is consumed). In
fact, athletes who train intensely may burn 600 to 1,200 calories or more per
hour (70). Several studies show that a carbohydrate intake ranging from 28 to
144 grams per hour (with higher amounts studied during cycling) during an
aerobic endurance activity can decrease reliance on limited glycogen stores,
extend time to exhaustion, and improve performance by providing a steady
stream of carbohydrate that can be used for energy (32, 66, 137).
Despite greater intakes per hour, as noted earlier, exogenous (external; that
which is consumed) carbohydrate oxidation rates do not exceed 1.0 to 1.1 gram
per minute, likely due to the rate of glucose absorption and possibly also the
limited delivery rate of 1 gram per minute of glucose into the bloodstream (65).
However, each carbohydrate has a different rate of oxidation. Glucose, sucrose,
maltose, maltodextrins, and amylopectin are oxidized quickly; the oxidation rates
of fructose, galactose, and amylose are 25% to 50% slower (65). Additionally,
each type of carbohydrate has a different intestinal transport system. If an
athlete 
consumes 
one 
type 
of 
carbohydrate—fructose, 
for 
instance—
626
