exercises because of the great stresses placed on the shoulder. For
these exercises, it is particularly important to warm up with relatively
light weights and to follow a program that exercises the shoulder in
a balanced way, using all of its major movements.
Knees
The knee is prone to injury because of its location between two long
levers (the upper and lower leg). Flexion and extension about the
knee occur almost exclusively in the sagittal plane. Rotation in the
frontal plane and transverse plane is prevented mainly by
ligamentous and cartilaginous stabilizing structures. Frontal plane
torque on the knee occurs, for example, when a football player is hit
at midleg from the side while the foot is planted firmly on the
ground. Fortunately, in training, resistive torques occur almost
exclusively within the knee’s normal plane of rotation.
Of the various components of the knee, the patella and
surrounding tissue are most susceptible to the kinds of forces
encountered in resistance training. The patella’s main function is to
hold the quadriceps tendon away from the knee axis of rotation,
thereby increasing the moment arm of the quadriceps group and its
mechanical advantage (figure 2.5, page 30). If inappropriate load,
volume, or recovery is introduced, repetitive high forces encountered
by the patellar tendon during resistance training (as with any high-
force activity such as running) can lead to tendinitis, which is
characterized by tenderness and swelling. There is no inherent risk
of tendinitis with performing these exercises; rather, tendinitis is
simply a function of too much volume and intensity without
appropriate progression.
It is not unusual for individuals to use knee wraps during training
or competition in order to assist with maximizing performance or
preventing injury. Wraps vary from the thin, elastic, pull-on variety
that can be purchased in drug stores to the heavy, specialized wraps
sold only through weightlifting supply houses. The use of knee
wraps, particularly the heavy ones, is most prevalent among
167
