the neural adaptation is greater, resulting in a lower neural output to
produce the same submaximal force, even with similar hypertrophy
to low-load (30% 1RM) resistance training (80a). Such results
demonstrate the importance of progressive overloading during
resistance training and how it promotes the activation of an optimal
amount of muscle tissue to meet force production requirements.
Other motor unit adaptations include changes in the rate and
sequence of firing. A positive relationship exists between the
magnitude of force produced and the rate of motor unit firing; high
firing rates from the onset of ballistic muscle contraction are
especially critical to increased rates of force development (3). The
increase in firing rate (vs. recruitment) appears to depend on muscle
size and the number of motor units that compose the muscle, such
that smaller muscles rely more on an increased firing rate to
enhance force production, whereas larger muscles depend more on
recruitment (61). Evidence suggests that anaerobic training can play
a role in enhancing firing rates of recruited motor units (3). For
example, resistance training may result in a more synchronized
pattern (i.e., the firing of two or more motor units at a fixed interval)
of activation during the exertion of large forces, rather than the
customary asynchronous pattern usually common to motor function
(149). Although the specific role of motor unit synchronization
during 
anaerobic 
training 
remains 
to 
be 
fully 
elucidated,
synchronization is potentially more critical to the rate of force
development and less significant concerning the overall level of force
developed.
Neuromuscular Junction
The neuromuscular junction (NMJ) is the interface between the
nerve and the skeletal muscle fibers, and it represents another
potential site for neural adaptation following anaerobic training (42,
43). Because of the difficulty in investigating this structure, most
studies examining the NMJ have used animal models to demonstrate
its adaptation to exercise. Deschenes and colleagues (44) examined
293
