Standard Nutrition Guidelines
For general nutrition information, strength and conditioning
professionals may want to refer their athletes to MyPlate, a food
guidance system created by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in
2011 and based on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans to help
consumers make better food choices (100). MyPlate icon illustrates
the five food groups based on a mealtime visual, the place setting
(figure 10.1). Another helpful resource geared more toward athletes
is the Performance Enhancing Plate from the Collegiate and
Professional Sports Dietitians Association (CPSDA, www.sportsrd
.org). This plate encourages athletes on hard training days to make
half their plate whole grains to fuel muscles, followed by 1/4 of the
plate from fruits and vegetables and the other 1/4 from proteins.
MyPlate Guidelines and Recommendations
Information related to MyPlate can be found at www.myplate.gov.
Although the basic guidelines represented by the MyPlate icon and
corresponding educational materials are universal, they include
calorie 
guidelines 
and 
portion 
recommendations 
for 
fruits,
vegetables, grains, protein foods, and dairy and fortified soy
alternatives, based on age and sex for individuals who get less than
30 minutes of moderate physical activity most days, as noted in
tables 10.1 to 10.6 on pages 221 through 226. Those who are more
physically active should adjust the guidelines to meet their specific
dietary needs (143). Additional key nutritional topics for MyPlate
include guidelines for oils, added sugars, saturated fats, sodium, and
alcohol. Oils are not a food group but provide important nutrients
such as mono- and polyunsaturated fats and vitamin E. Added
sugars are sugars and syrups that are added to foods or beverages
when they are made. To build healthy eating habits and stay within
calorie needs, people over age 2 should eat foods and drink
beverages with little or no added sugars; athletes who need
hydration beverages with added sugars are the exception to this
543
