activity and its influence on energy supply. Over the course of a
season, 
high-level 
male 
aerobic 
endurance 
runners’ 
basal
concentrations of certain hormones (e.g., testosterone and insulin)
may change and be more sensitive to variances in training
parameters such as intensity and distance run each week than
hormones such as cortisol (1). Further, these responses may also be
influenced 
by 
energy 
availability, 
with 
basal 
testosterone
concentrations decreasing for athletes who ran a greater number of
miles and had low energy availability (1). Additionally, research on
elite rowers has demonstrated that certain hormones (testosterone
and cortisol) may be more sensitive to changes in training volume
than hormones such as growth hormone (129). Also worth noting is
that low energy availability can affect the degree of protein
involvement in aerobic endurance exercise, particularly during bouts
of long duration (94). Therefore, consideration must be given over
the course of a season as to how the training variables are
manipulated and energy supplies are affected, not to mention how
an athlete recovers (i.e., type of recovery strategies employed
including nutrition), because these factors will determine the
endocrine response as well as the adaptations experienced during
and after training. An important point related to all this information
is what is known as relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S). For
more detail, see chapter 11.
Aerobic training, especially running, is often associated with an
acute increase in net protein breakdown from the muscle (155),
brought about in part by acute stress-induced cortisol secretion
(142, 143) despite concomitant increases in anabolic hormones such
as testosterone and IGF-1 (160). However, evidence suggests that
net protein synthesis in skeletal muscle of aerobic endurance-trained
athletes does occur and may lead to muscle hypertrophy (81), but it
is most likely due to mitochondrial rather than contractile proteins
(161, 166). Further, the turnover rate of mitochondrial proteins and
myofibrillar proteins may be different, which may influence the
recovery capacity of the muscle after exercise (145). This may be
353
