Models of Periodization
While the scientific and coaching literature presents numerous models of
periodization, all models can be classified under three general models (figure
22.5).
Parallel Training Models
The parallel training models, as shown in figure 22.5, involve targeting all
training factors simultaneously within one training session, training day, series of
training days, or a microcycle (33, 35, 37, 38). Sometimes this approach is
referred to as the concurrent or complex parallel approach (4). This planning
approach aligns with the early stages of most long-term athlete development
models (61, 62) where youth athletes are exposed to multilateral training
strategies. Additionally, this approach works well with novice and developmental
athletes (38). A major concern with parallel models is that as the athlete develops
his or her total training load (i.e., volume or load, time dedicated to training, etc.)
must be continually increased (35) and may exceed his or her training tolerance
(51). As such, this model may not be the best option when working with
intermediate to elite athletes, who require greater training variation and stimulus
to continue to stimulate adaptation and elevate performance (16, 35, 37, 38).
With these athletes it may be warranted to implement different planning
strategies (i.e., emphasis or parallel models) to optimize the training process (38).
Sequential Training Models
Sequential training models, as shown in figure 22.5, were created to address
the limitations associated with the parallel model of training, such as the inability
to simultaneously develop multiple motor and technical abilities, the need for
longer preparation periods, and the inability to accommodate dense competitive
schedules (38, 52). These models are used to organize an individual or limited
number of training factors into a logical pattern that guides the athlete toward a
targeted outcome. This approach is ideally suited for athletes who require a
greater training stimulus than what can be provided with the parallel approach
(38).
This approach to organizing training has been successfully implemented with
individual sports such as weightlifting (97), cross-country skiing (87), cycling (23,
80), track and field (74), and aerobic endurance sports (53). Additionally, this
approach has been successfully implemented with team sports such as American
football (46), basketball (76), football (30), ice hockey (81), and team handball
(63).
1589
