become very fatigued after several testing sets, resulting in a loss of proper
exercise technique and an invalid test.
A variety of procedures can be used to accurately determine a 1RM; one
method is described in figure 18.8. Despite an orderly testing sequence,
variations in training status and exercise type will affect the absolute load
increases in sequential testing sets. For example, the gradual load increase for
1RM attempts for an athlete who can back squat 495 pounds (225 kg) may be
20 to 30 pounds (9-14 kg) per testing set. For a weaker athlete with a back
squat 1RM of 100 pounds (45 kg), a 20- or 30-pound testing load increment is
too aggressive and is not precise enough to yield an accurate 1RM value. To
improve the appropriateness and accuracy of the sequential testing sets, figure
18.8 also includes relative percentages that can be used instead of the absolute
load adjustments.
Estimating a 1RM
When maximal strength testing is not warranted, testing with a 3RM or 5RM
load (and then estimating or predicting the 1RM) can be a suitable secondary
option. This approach is appropriate for nearly all athletes, provided they can
demonstrate the proper technique in the exercise tested. Core and assistance
exercises can be selected for RM testing, but excessive warm-up and testing sets
may fatigue the athlete and compromise the accuracy of the test. It should be
noted, however, that the level of accuracy of predicting a 1RM from other xRM
tests becomes less accurate (i.e., commonly resulting in overestimations of the
1RM) as the number of repetitions completed increases and may also be
affected by the type of training with which the athlete is familiar (134).
Additionally, power exercises do not lend themselves well to xRM testing above 5
repetitions for repeated testing sets because technique can deteriorate rapidly
(71). Lower (and more accurate) xRM determinations using heavier loads can be
made once the athlete has sufficient training and technique experience.
The protocol for multiple RM testing is similar to that for 1RM testing, but
each set requires multiple repetitions, not one. After the completion of warm-up
sets, the athlete’s sequential load changes for the 10RM test are smaller than
those listed in figure 18.8 (approximately one-half). Continue the process of
testing until a load allowing the selected number of repetitions is determined. An
experienced strength and conditioning professional will be able to adjust the
loads so that the multiple RM can be measured within 3 to 5 testing sets.
Using a 1RM Table To estimate the athlete’s 1RM, consult table 18.9. In the
“Maximum repetitions (RM)” = 10 (%1RM = 75) row, first find the tested 10RM
load; then read across the row to the “Maximum repetitions (RM)” = 1 (%1RM
= 100) row to discover the athlete’s projected 1RM. For example, if an athlete’s
1227
