athlete completes a lift or a drill, the other athlete can observe
during his or her rest period and vice versa. Sakadjian and
colleagues (49) found that observational practice combined with
physical practice facilitated improved power clean technique as
compared to physical practice alone. Observational practice can
assist athletes in achieving the desired technique, thus maintaining
athlete safety and allowing for a more rapid progression to heavier
lifting.
Instructions
A coach can facilitate learning by varying the amount of detail
provided in the instruction to the athletes’ strongest learning style.
Instructional styles can be divided into explicit instructions, guided
discovery, and discovery. Explicit instructions include prescriptive
information that gives the athlete the “rules” for effectively executing
the given task. In learning a squat, the athlete receives detailed
instructions about the specific body position throughout the
movement as well as the type (e.g., flexion–extension) and amount
of movement at each of the joints. Guided discovery provides the
athlete with instructions about the overall movement goal and
important prompts for task accomplishment without explicitly telling
the athlete how to accomplish the task. The athlete is told the goal
of the squat depth jump and a few key reminders to prevent injury,
such as maintaining a neutral spine. This style provides some
direction while allowing the athlete to explore relationships between
the executed movement patterns and the associated movement
goal. Finally, discovery instructs the athlete on the overarching goal
of the task and the athlete receives little to no direction. In this
instance the athlete is just told to squat to a particular depth and is
allowed to explore methods to accomplish this task. A discovery
instructional style can slow the learning process, while explicit
instructions can impair performance in a stressful environment (56).
The decreased attentional demands of discovery and guided
528
