empty rapidly from the stomach and minimize any potential for gastrointestinal
distress, and moderate in protein (protein promotes longer-lasting satiety and
accelerates recovery) (7).
Athletes can choose from either high or low glycemic index (131) (see chapter
10 for more details) carbohydrates before competition based on individual
preference or tolerance and fiber content; research does not indicate that one is
more advantageous than the other (15). Even though consuming carbohydrates
that rapidly increase insulin, such as glucose, will lead to an initial drop in blood
sugar at the beginning of exercise, blood sugar levels typically return to normal
within approximately 20 minutes, and the initial drop has no negative effect on
performance (82).
Minimizing Gastrointestinal Issues
To minimize the likelihood of stomach discomfort during competition, athletes should do the
following:
Try food in practice first. Always try new foods during several practice sessions before
competition (7).
When the meal is closer in time to the start of the game or event, consume smaller amounts
of food and liquids.
Avoid high-fat and high-fiber foods. Both fat and fiber slow down the rate of digestion. When
food is still being digested as an athlete exercises, he or she may experience stomach cramps
(7).
Avoid sugar alcohols. Despite their name, sugar alcohols contain no alcohol, but their
chemical structure resembles that of both sugar and alcohol. Sugar alcohols are a type of
carbohydrate that is not completely absorbed in the gut. Consequently, consumption can
cause gas, bloating, and cramping and may have a laxative effect. Sugar alcohols are found in
some low-carbohydrate and sugar-free products, including sugar-free gum, toothpaste, and
energy drinks. The two sugar alcohols most likely to cause gastrointestinal issues are sorbitol
and mannitol (4). Any product that could result in consumption of 20 grams of mannitol must
carry this warning on the label: “Excess consumption may have a laxative effect.” Individual
responses to sugar alcohol vary. Sugar alcohols include xylitol (the most common one found
in dental products), erythritol, sorbitol, mannitol, maltitol, isomalt, lactitol, hydrogenated
starch hydrolysates, and hydrogenated glucose syrups (4).
Aerobic Endurance Sports
The precompetition meal may be most important for aerobic endurance athletes
who compete in long-duration activity (>2 h) in the morning after an overnight
fast. Upon waking in the morning, blood sugar levels are low and liver glycogen
stores are substantially reduced. Both conditions decrease the amount of
carbohydrate available for use as energy. Carbohydrates at the precompetition
meal can significantly enhance glycogen stores and improve exercise time to
616
