time (96). Instead, resting concentrations likely reflect the current
state of the muscle tissue in response to substantial changes to the
training program (i.e., volume or intensity) and nutritional factors. It
appears that the elevation during and immediately following a
workout may present receptors with enough of a stimulus to affect
tissue remodeling without the need for chronic elevations in basal
concentrations (36). It is important to note that chronic elevations in
an anabolic hormone may be counterproductive over the long term.
Receptors tend to downregulate over time when exposed
consistently to high levels of hormones. For example, in type 2
diabetes mellitus, sensitivity of skeletal muscle to insulin is reduced
due to chronic elevated blood insulin. This is why anabolic steroid
users repeatedly cycle drug use rather than maintaining consistently
high doses.
Hormone Receptor Changes
Receptor content is important for mediating the adaptations elicited
by any hormonal response. Androgen receptors (AR) have received
much attention in the literature, and their content (i.e., number of
receptors per area on the target tissue) depends on several factors
including 
muscle 
fiber 
type, 
contractile 
activity, 
and 
the
concentrations of testosterone. Resistance training has been shown
to upregulate AR content within 48 to 72 hours after the workout
(73). The resistance exercise stimulus appears to mediate the
magnitude of acute AR modifications. Ratamess and colleagues
(137) compared 1 set versus 6 sets of 10 repetitions of squats and
reported no differences in AR content following the single-set
protocol; however, the higher-volume protocol elicited significant
downregulation of AR content 1 hour after the workout. This study
also demonstrated that when sufficient volume is reached, AR
protein content may initially downregulate before the upregulation
that has been shown in other studies. However, Kraemer and
colleagues (98) have shown that consumption of a protein–
323
