motor control and functional anatomy, but athletes fortunately do
not have to devote much conscious attention to this coordinated
action. In fact, the action can become altered and inefficient if they
think about it too much, because they change the neural sequences
for movement initiation. From an attentional perspective, simple or
well-learned skills are less affected by a high degree of arousal
because they have few task-relevant cues to monitor (64).
Fortunately, then, physiological arousal, which typically accompanies
emotional arousal, may be beneficial. However, the situation is
dramatically reversed for skills that necessitate conscious decision-
making effort, such as those required by a goalie in soccer or a
baseball catcher who is facing a critical, bases-loaded pitch. In these
instances, arousal must be optimized because of the need to
maintain a wider focus so as to recognize relevant attentional cues.
Inverted-U Theory
Building on the basic relationship outlined in drive theory, Yerkes and
Dodson (76) proposed one of the major tenets of the arousal–
performance relationship—the inverted-U theory. Basically, this
theory states that arousal facilitates performance up to an optimal
level, beyond which further increases in arousal are associated with
reduced performance. Figure 9.2 graphically shows this relationship.
Most coaches and athletes intuitively accept this hypothesis, because
they have all experienced poor performance when feeling flat or
under-aroused, as well as when they feel too amped up or out of
control. The inverted-U concept helps coaches and athletes
understand why arousal affects performance and enables them to
gain greater control over the appropriate level of arousal for a given
athlete within a given sport. It should be noted, however, that the
generic shape of the curve in this relationship has been criticized,
given our understanding of the individual influences of skill, ability,
experience, and task complexity as described previously (20).
478
