Football League players (117), and collegiate athletes (146).
Additionally, a 2014 estimate indicated that between 2.9 and 4.0
million Americans have likely used anabolic steroids at some point in
their lifetime (173). Evidence also indicates that many steroid users
are secretive, with more than 50% of users indicating that they have
never disclosed their use of anabolic steroids to their physician
(176). Therefore, anabolic steroid use is still prevalent and an
important concern among recreational and athletic populations, with
some estimates suggesting roughly 100,000 new users per year
(24). Although results of several surveys suggest that anabolic
steroid use appears to have been declining over the last few decades
(213), anabolic steroids are among the top sport issues today
because of reported use in many sports over time (73).
Strength athletes are not the only users of anabolic steroids.
People outside organized sport use steroids to enhance appearance
rather than performance (56). National surveys of male American
high school seniors showed that approximately 7% were using, or
had used, anabolic steroids (12, 35). One-third of the admitted
steroid users were not involved in school-sponsored sports, and
more than one-fourth stated that their main reason for using
steroids was to improve appearance as opposed to athletic
performance. Pope and his colleagues (172, 174) described a subset
of bodybuilders with an altered self-image who believed that they
looked small and weak even though they were large and muscular.
These individuals used ergogenic substances and weight training to
increase their body size. Pope calls this condition “reverse anorexia
nervosa”; it is also known as muscle dysmorphia. These
bodybuilders appear to be substantially different from competitive
athletes in terms of their objectives, the substantial health risks that
some of them are willing to take, and their strategies of using
extremely large doses of anabolic steroids. This phenomenon may
suggest why the most serious illnesses associated with steroid use
have occurred almost exclusively in bodybuilders and not in other
steroid-using athletes (77).
674
