Principles of Anaerobic Exercise Prescription
Resistance training programs for athletic populations require attention to the
principles of specificity, overload, progression, variation, reversibility, and
individualization. One of the most basic concepts to incorporate in all training
programs is specificity. The term, first suggested by DeLorme in 1945 (39),
refers to the method whereby an athlete is trained in a specific manner to
produce a specific adaptation or training outcome. In the case of resistance
training, specificity refers to aspects such as the muscles involved, the muscle
action (e.g., concentric, eccentric, and isometric), and the movement velocity
and coordination (i.e., movement pattern; this does not mean replicating specific
sporting movements), but it does not always reflect the combination of all these
aspects. Importantly, it does not mean that all aspects of the training must
directly mimic that of the sporting skill. For example, a squat movement is
relevant to the vertical jump because it involves overcoming resistance in a
similar movement pattern (e.g., combined knee and hip flexion followed by
forceful knee and hip extension) and engages muscles (i.e., predominantly the
knee and hip extensors) that are involved in the vertical jump, yet the speed of
movement and force application are disparate between the squat and vertical
jump. Sometimes used interchangeably with specificity is the acronym SAID,
which stands for specific adaptation to imposed demands. The underlying
principle is that the type of demand placed on the body dictates the type of
adaptation that will occur. For instance, athletes training for power in high-speed
movements (e.g., baseball pitch or tennis serve) should attempt to activate or
recruit the same motor units required by their sport at the highest velocity
possible (160, 163). Additionally, specific improvements in force and velocity
characteristics may occur following heavy or ballistic resistance training, with
greater improvements in power production occurring in response to strength
training targeting increases in maximal strength in weak athletes (26, 28, 29).
Specificity also relates to the athlete’s sport season. As an athlete progresses
through the preseason, in-season, and postseason, all forms of training should
gradually progress in an organized manner from general to specific (159).
Although participation in the sport itself provides the greatest opportunity to
improve performance in the sport, the proper application of the specificity
principle certainly increases the likelihood that other training will also positively
contribute to performance via the transference of training adaptations in the
gym to the sport-specific skills.
Overload refers to the application of a training stimulus that exceeds what
the athlete is accustomed to (i.e., increased load, sets, or repetitions [i.e.,
volume]) and produces an adaptation beyond the baseline abilities of the
1188
