Programs for both the healthy and the damaged tissues of an
injured athlete require the same basic design principles provided in
chapter 18. According to the specific adaptation to imposed
demands (SAID) principle, the system will adapt to the demands
placed on it. Therefore, the goal of training (specific adaptation)
should dictate the design of the resistance training program
(imposed demands). For example, during the remodeling phase of
an injured marathoner’s patellofemoral rehabilitation, his or her
quadriceps muscles should be trained with an emphasis on muscular
endurance. Therefore, the athlete should perform many repetitions
of the rehabilitation exercises to prepare the muscles for the
demands of long-distance running. Conversely, a weightlifting
athlete rehabilitating from the same injury requires fewer repetitions
of high-intensity rehabilitation and reconditioning exercises during
the later portions of the remodeling phase to prepare the muscles
for the power demands of this sport. Refer to table 23.3 for a
comparative example of the rehabilitation strategies for these two
athletes.
Aerobic and Anaerobic Training
Although research has yet to determine an optimal aerobic training
program for use in the rehabilitation setting, it is generally accepted
that the program should mimic specific sport and metabolic demands
as closely as possible. The strength and conditioning professional,
having a background in designing and implementing conditioning
exercises for healthy athletes, is the ideal member of the allied
health team to prescribe and supervise the aerobic training portion
of the injured athlete’s reconditioning program. As with the
resistance 
training 
program, 
the 
strength 
and 
conditioning
professional must consider the demands that the given sport places
on the injured athlete. Keeping these demands and the
contraindications of the injury in mind, the strength and conditioning
professional can use the prescription guidelines in chapters 17 and
1661
