following an injury may impede healing in human subjects. Contradictory evidence
exists to determine if reductions in muscle performance occur following
cryotherapy (31, 41).
Evidence pertaining to cryotherapy after injury has supported a pain-relieving
analgesic effect via reduced nerve conduction velocity, with additional benefits that
include a suppression of the inflammatory response with the potential to reduce
swelling and enhanced return to sport (6, 31, 35, 37, 51, 96). Following exercise,
evidence supports the use of cryotherapy to reduce symptoms of delayed onset
muscle soreness (DOMS); however, systemic reductions in insulin-like growth
factor (IGF) and protein synthesis may occur, impairing recovery (23, 73, 96).
Thus, cryotherapy is recommended in the acute inflammatory stage as part of the
POLICE strategy (20). A 15-minute duration is adequate when ice packs, ice
massage, and cold-water immersion are used (31). Cold-water immersion (<59 °F
[<15 °C]) is a more efficient option when a larger coverage area is needed (e.g.,
whole hand or ankle) and is likely to have a greater effect on cooling deeper tissue
(31). Local cryotherapy applications beyond the acute inflammatory phase are not
warranted. Although cryotherapy may reduce DOMS and be effective when rapid
recovery is needed, routine use is not recommended because it may impair protein
synthesis (23).
Exercise Strategies
Although a rapid return to competition is often a goal, protective
loading, also known as active rest, of the injured area is initially
necessary to safeguard the damaged tissue from additional injury.
Therefore, painful or intense exercise directly involving or stressing
the injured area is not recommended during this phase. Exercises
that do not directly involve or stress the injured area (e.g., upper
extremity exercises for lower extremity injury, single-leg exercises
with the uninvolved limb) and pain-free active movement of the
involved area of injury may still be performed.
Fibroblastic Repair Phase
After the inflammatory response phase, the body begins to repair
the damaged tissue with similar new tissue; however, the resiliency
of this new tissue is low at this time. Repair of the weakened injury
site can take up to eight weeks if the proper amount of restorative
stress is applied, or longer if too much or too little stress is applied.
1647
