Muscle Length
At rest, actin and myosin filaments in muscle fibers lie alongside
each other, allowing for a maximal number of potential crossbridge
sites (figure 2.12; see chapter 1 for more details). This alignment
enables the muscle to generate the greatest force at its resting
length. When the muscle is stretched beyond its resting length,
fewer actin and myosin filaments align next to each other, reducing
the number of potential crossbridge sites and, consequently, the
force the muscle can generate. In this stretched state, a third
filament, titin, is recognized to play a critical role in force
development. Titin not only contributes to structural alignment but
also possesses mechanosensing properties. During eccentric muscle
actions beyond resting length, the increase in calcium concentration
in the sarcoplasm causes the spring-like titin to tighten. This
tightening helps in force production and aligns myosin filaments to
increase the potential crossbridge sites (23, 24, 61). Under load, titin
is considered to be a key influencer in trophic signaling, which can
be a contributor to skeletal muscle hypertrophy (26). Conversely,
when the muscle contracts too much below its resting length, the
actin filaments overlap excessively, reducing the number of
crossbridge sites and thus decreasing force generation capability.
Joint Angle
Because all body movements, even those occurring in a straight line,
take place by means of rotation about a joint or joints, the forces
that muscles produce must be manifested as torques; recall that a
higher torque value indicates a greater tendency for the applied
force to rotate the limb or body part about a joint. Consequently, we
speak of torque versus joint angle rather than force versus joint
angle. The amount of torque that can be exerted about a given body
joint varies throughout the joint’s range of motion, largely because
of the relationship of force versus muscle length, as well as the ever-
changing leverage brought about by the dynamic geometry of the
muscles, tendons, and internal joint structures. This is shown in
142
