Rehearsing successful execution of a skill during imagined
competitive conditions can provide the subconscious mind with
positive memories, thus increasing the athlete’s sense of confidence
and preparedness for the particular sport. Of course, mental imaging
is not as powerful a determinant of self-efficacy as actual success,
but it does offer two potentially potent ingredients. First, successful
performance is entirely under the control of the athlete during
imaging, whereas a degree of uncertainty about the outcome is
inherent in reality. In imagery the athlete has a great opportunity to
experience success. We believe that athletes should be realistic in
the kinds of success they imagine; that is, the mental images should
be personally challenging yet within the realm of possibility. Second,
the athlete can experience competition repeatedly, fostering a sense
of familiarity and preparedness.
For some athletes, the months of preparation for a season of play
—involving off-season, preseason, and in-season conditioning and
skill development—may lead to only a few minutes of actual
competitive experience. Even for the starters in team sports, actual
competitive experience may be extremely small relative to physical
practice time. Mental imagery, however, allows the athlete to get
used to this uncertain environment over longer periods of time
despite minimal real-world competitive opportunity.
Self-Efficacy
Of course, one of the main objectives for applied sport psychology is
generating a psychological perspective that improves performance,
and it has been argued that perceived self-confidence, or self-
efficacy (1), is a better predictor of task execution than either
arousal or anxiety. Self-confidence is the belief that one can
successfully perform a desired behavior (64), while self-efficacy, a
situationally specific form of self-confidence, is the perception of
one’s ability to perform a given task in a specific situation (4).
Someone who is highly self-efficacious does not doubt his or her
ability to succeed at a given task, even when failure is experienced.
496
