the upper body must be transmitted through the back to the legs
and ground. In addition, the back muscles act at a great mechanical
disadvantage and must generate forces much greater than the
weight of an object lifted. It is for these reasons that the back is
particularly vulnerable to injury. It should be noted, however, that
spinal internal loads are quite variable with different postures during
the movement (31) and that deep squatting positions with load are
not necessarily associated with back injury (22).
Back Injury
Back injury can be extremely debilitating, persistent, and difficult to
remedy. Thus, every effort should be made to avoid back injury
during resistance training. The lower back is particularly vulnerable.
It has been observed that 85% to 90% of all intervertebral disk
herniations occur at the disk between the lowest two lumbar
vertebrae (L4 and L5) or between the lowest lumbar and the top
sacral vertebra (L5 and S1) (1, 4). This is not surprising, given the
extremely high compressive forces on the disks during lifting. When
a weight is supported in the hands or on the shoulders and the trunk
is inclined forward, there is great torque about the lower
intervertebral disks due to the large perpendicular distance between
the lower back and the weight. The back muscles operate at an
extremely low mechanical advantage because the perpendicular
distance from the line of action of the spinal erector muscles to the
intervertebral disks is much shorter (about 5 cm, or 2 in) than the
perpendicular distance from the weight to the disks. As a result, the
muscles must exert forces that frequently exceed 10 times the
weight lifted (4). These forces act to squeeze the intervertebral disks
between the adjacent vertebral bodies and can lead to injury.
The neutral-back lifting posture has been found to be better
overall than a rounded (opposite of arched) back in minimizing
L5/S1 compressive forces and ligament strain (2). Therefore, a
normal lordotic lumbar spine position is superior to a rounded back
for avoiding injury to vertebrae, disks, facet joints, ligaments, and
162
