the fermentation process of alcohol and is the primary carbohydrate
in beer.
Polysaccharides, also known as complex carbohydrates, contain
up to thousands of glucose units. Some of the most common
polysaccharides of nutritional importance are starch, fiber, and
glycogen. Starch is the storage form of glucose in plants. Grains,
legumes, and vegetables are good sources of starch. Before starch
can be used as a source of energy, it must be broken down into
glucose components. Dietary fiber, a constituent of the plant cell
wall, is also a form of carbohydrate. Cellulose, hemicellulose, beta-
glucans, and pectins are fibers; these and noncarbohydrate fibrous
materials (lignins) are partially resistant to human digestive
enzymes. Fibers have different physiological effects in the body.
Some delay gastric emptying, which may temporarily influence
feelings of fullness, while other types of fiber increase bulk and
water content, reducing constipation and decreasing transit time of
feces. In addition, some soluble fibers decrease the absorption of
cholesterol and may therefore help reduce blood cholesterol levels
after ingestion (104), while prebiotic dietary fibers selectively
stimulate the growth of bacteria in the gut (33, 133). Fiber-rich
foods include beans, peas, bran, many fruits and vegetables, and
some whole-grain foods.
Glycogen is found in small (80, 161) amounts in human liver and
muscle, totaling approximately 15 grams of glycogen per kilogram
body weight (1) and in animal tissue as a temporary source of
stored energy (22). While present in animal meats we eat such as
steak, chicken breast, and fish fillets, it is not present to any large
extent. When glucose enters the muscles and liver, if it is not
metabolized for energy it can be synthesized to form glycogen.
Three-quarters of the glycogen in the body is stored in skeletal
muscle; the remaining quarter is stored in the liver (22). The process
of converting glucose to glycogen is called glycogenesis.
Athletes typically consume a variety of carbohydrates in their
normal diets. However, when they want to improve the quality of
560
