The second consideration relates to the handle, because it is the
major interface between the athlete and the kettlebell. With cast iron
kettlebells, the handle diameter changes slightly as the weight
increases. For example, a 20-kilogram (44 lb) or heavier kettlebell
has a handle between 33 (1.3 in.) and 35 (1.4 in.) millimeters; a
smaller kettlebell may have a smaller handle diameter. Additionally,
to facilitate the types of exercises that use kettlebells, the spacing
between the handle and the top of the ball is standardized in good
kettlebells. Typically, the space between the bottom of the handle
and the top of the ball is 55 millimeters (2.2 in.), and the length of
the handle is 186 millimeters (7.3 in.) (28). With regard to handle
surface, some kettlebells come with smooth painted handles; others
have polished steel handles, which have no paint and are basically
bare metal. The polished steel handle tends to allow for a better grip
because it holds chalk better and does not get as slippery as painted
or polished handles do when athletes sweat on them (28).
Landmine Exercises
The landmine resistance training device is a useful device for
performing loaded rotational resistance training exercises (4). The
performance of this exercise involves placing the end of a standard
Olympic barbell (i.e., 20 kg [44 lb]) into a metal cylinder that is
attached to a standard squat rack or stand-alone base attachment
through a universal joint (4). With this set-up, the barbell is used as
a lever and is rotated around the fixed end, allowing for loaded
rotational movements to be performed (4). Alternatively, if a
purpose-built receptacle is not available, one end of the barbell can
be placed in contact with the floor at the corner of a wall and a
similar movement pattern can be performed (148). Regardless of the
how the barbell is anchored, additional resistance can be added to
the free end of the barbell, thus allowing for the application of
variable and multiplanar resistance during rotational movements (26,
80, 167).
1132
