that physical training delays or accelerates growth or maturation in
boys and girls (70). Further, the osteogenic benefits of physical
activity, 
specifically 
weight-bearing 
activities 
that 
generate
compressive forces, are essential for skeletal remodeling and growth
(228).
The gold standard for determining biological maturation is skeletal
age assessment. This technique involves trained radiographers
comparing X-rays or radiographs of a child against standard
reference radiographs to determine the extent of ossification of the
bones of the left wrist (93, 201, 217-219). Ossification refers to the
process of laying down new bone material by cells called
osteoblasts. While skeletal age provides the most accurate and
reliable form of assessing maturity, concerns with cost, specialist
equipment, time constraints, and the need for specific radiographic
expertise make the method unrealistic for most practitioners working
with youth. Furthermore, strength and conditioning professionals are
not qualified to determine sexual age as an indicator of maturation,
given the invasive nature of this assessment.
For most practitioners, the most realistic and feasible means of
estimating biological age is from somatic assessments (142).
Somatic age reflects the degree of growth in overall stature or
smaller subdimensions of the body (e.g., limb length). Measures of
growth (e.g., standing height and seated height) are relatively easy
to collect, are noninvasive, and require minimal equipment.
Techniques available to the practitioner include longitudinal growth
curve analysis, percentages and predictions of final adult height
(125), and the prediction of age from peak height velocity (PHV)
(158), which is defined as the age at maximum rate of growth
during the pubertal growth spurt (59) with the mean age, on
average, being around 13.8 years in boys and 11.9 year in girls (10).
While the percentage of predicted adult height (125) and the
maturity offset (158) have both been used to assign youth into
maturity categories, longitudinal data indicate that the percentage of
predicted adult height might be more accurate at predicting
391
