used to improve cardiovascular endurance (58, 130), although to a lesser extent
than conventional aerobic exercise training.
“Push” and “Pull” Exercises (Alternated)
Another method of improving efficiency of training when time is limited is to
alternate pushing exercises (e.g., bench press, shoulder press, triceps extension)
with pulling exercises (e.g., lat pulldown, bent-over row, biceps curl) (2). This
push–pull arrangement ensures that the same muscle group will not be used in
two exercises (or sets, in some cases) in succession, thus reducing fatigue in the
involved muscles. This approach is similar to the programming of antagonistic
supersets, described later. In contrast, arranging several pulling exercises (e.g.,
pull-up, seated row, hammer curl) one after the other, even with a rest period
between each, will compromise the number of repetitions performed because
the biceps brachii muscle (involved in all three exercises) will become less
responsive due to fatigue. The same result would occur if several pushing
exercises (e.g., incline bench press, shoulder press, triceps pushdown) were
sequentially arranged (all three engage the triceps brachii) (150). There are also
push–pull arrangements for the lower body—for example, back squat and front
squat as “push” and stiff-legged deadlift and leg (knee) curl as “pull”—but the
classification of some exercises as “push” or “pull” is not as clear (e.g., leg
[knee] extension). However, in such examples strength and conditioning
professionals need to be mindful when selecting such exercises to ensure that
key stabilizing muscles (e.g., erector spinae) are not excessively fatigued in both
exercises. Alternating push and pull exercises is also used in circuit training
programs and is an ideal arrangement for novice athletes or those returning to a
resistance training program (3).
Supersets and Compound Sets
Other methods of arranging exercises involve having athletes perform one set of
a pair of exercises with little to no rest between them. Two common examples
are supersets and compound sets. A superset involves two sequentially
performed exercises that stress two opposing muscles or muscle areas (i.e., an
agonist and its antagonist) (2), similar to the push–pull approach. For example,
an athlete performs 10 repetitions of the barbell biceps curl exercise, sets the
barbell down, then goes over to the triceps pushdown station and performs 10
repetitions. A compound set involves sequentially performing two different
exercises for the same muscle group (2). For instance, an athlete completes a
set of the barbell biceps curl exercise, then switches to dumbbells and
immediately performs a set of the hammer curl exercise. In this case, the stress
on the same muscle is compounded because both exercises recruit the same
1219
