Time before
competition
Food
recommendations
Fluid
recommendations
Sample
precompetition
meals for a 68
kg (150 lb)
athlete
Sample meals based on
food and fluid
recommendations
white
bread)
(skip
high-
fiber
breads
before
workout)
14 fl oz (414
mL) water
Note: These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes.
Athletes may want to keep a record of their food intake, including the time
each meal or snack was consumed and how they felt while training. By recording
the types and amounts of food consumed and when these are consumed in
relation to training, athletes may be able to identify any issues they are having
with performance or stomach upset and develop a better precompetition plan.
Carbohydrate foods that are high in fructose, sorbitol, and fermentable
oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols (FODMAPs) may
increase the risk of gastrointestinal distress when consumed before exercise.
Selecting foods that are lower FODMAP and lower fructose may minimize the
likelihood of gastrointestinal issues.
The primary purpose of the precompetition meal is to provide
sufficient fluid to maintain hydration and carbohydrate to
maximize blood glucose and stored glycogen while also satisfying
hunger.
Carbohydrate Loading
Depletion of muscle and liver glycogen leads to fatigue during long-term aerobic
endurance exercise (117, 129, 141). Therefore, a technique called carbohydrate
loading has been used for decades to enhance muscle glycogen before aerobic
endurance events. Although there are many different variations of carbohydrate
loading, all include high carbohydrate intake in the days leading up to an event
to maximize glycogen stores and therefore carbohydrate availability in the later
stages of the event (32). Carbohydrate loading offers potential benefits for
athletes training and competing for more than 90 minutes, such as distance
runners, road cyclists, cross-country skiers, and other aerobic endurance athletes
who risk depleting glycogen stores, and it may conceivably benefit other athletes
as well (112).
620
