Tire Flipping
Tire flipping typically employs truck or heavy-equipment tires that
can be modified via placement of an extra load in the center to
address individual strength needs (59, 147). The selection of the
appropriate tire size depends on numerous factors that the strength
and conditioning professional must consider when designing a
specific program for an athlete. Thought must be given to the tire’s
dimensions, including the height, width, and weight (21). A key
consideration is the tread on the tire; worn treads are more difficult
to grip, and pronounced treads potentially contain cuts, debris, or
exposed metal that could put the athlete at risk for injury (21, 147).
The most common injury associated with the tire flip is biceps
tears (158), which may occur when the hands slip on the tire. To
mitigate this injury risk, it is generally recommended that the tires
used should be dry and have sufficient tread to allow the athlete to
maintain grip and properly execute the exercise (21). Additionally, it
is important that the tire is selected based on the individual athlete’s
strength levels and that the movement is performed with
appropriate exercise technique so that injury risk is minimized.
Three basic techniques have been used to describe tire flip
techniques: the sumo, the backlift style, and shoulders-against-the-
tire technique (21, 147). The sumo and backlift styles are somewhat
similar in that the feet are placed close to the tire, but they differ on
the width of the feet, somewhat similar to the sumo and
conventional deadlift starting positions, respectively (147). With
these two techniques, once the tire has been raised to hip or chest
height, the hands are rotated so that a forward pressing action can
be performed with the arms to flip the tire (147). The shoulders-
against-the-tire technique has a similar starting position to a rugby
scrum or prowler push, with the athlete’s face almost touching the
tire, trunk horizontal, and the feet positioned behind the body so
that the shins are horizontal, with the knees positioned slightly in
front of the hips and flexed to approximately 90 degrees (21).
1123
