The popularity and effectiveness of low-carbohydrate diets may have less to do with cutting
carbohydrates (in healthy individuals) and more to do with a temporary decrease in water weight,
cutting calories, and increasing protein intake. When people significantly reduce their carbohydrate
intake, they deplete their glycogen stores (carbohydrate stored with three to four parts water) and
therefore quickly drop pounds from water weight. Once carbohydrates are reintroduced into the
diet, they can rapidly gain the weight back (71).
Over time, however, low-carbohydrate diets may work for some people because of the
consumption of increased levels of protein. Protein increases feelings of fullness (satiety) in a dose-
dependent manner—the more protein consumed at one sitting, the greater its effect on satiety.
However, at this time the “optimal dose” for maximum satiety remains unclear. Protein also
increases the thermic effect of feeding. More calories are burned during digesting and processing
protein than carbohydrate or fat. And finally, protein helps spare metabolically active lean muscle
tissue during weight loss. This is important because muscle burns a few more calories at rest than
fat does, and over time this can affect body weight. Plus, more muscle may mean that a person
can train harder and therefore burn more calories during training (91).
Though cutting carbohydrates may be detrimental for a number of competitive athletes,
particularly during precompetition and competition phases, it is a very effective approach for
someone with insulin resistance (a condition that leads to the buildup of glucose in the blood
because the body does not use insulin effectively) as well as type 2 diabetes. It may also be an
effective approach for overweight and obese individuals (51, 54, 149).
No single body fat measure should be used to assess health, disease, or
disease risk (26). Overweight and obesity combined with other risk factors,
including high blood pressure, high low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, low high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol, high triglycerides, high blood glucose, physical
inactivity, family history of premature heart disease, or cigarette smoking,
increase a person’s risk for heart disease (92).
Although all obese individuals share the trait of excess body fat, they cannot
be treated homogeneously. They must be screened for coexisting illnesses such
as diabetes, orthopedic problems, cardiac disease, psychological disorders such
as binge-eating disorder or depression, social and cultural influences, and
readiness for change. Obese athletes who are mandated to lose weight (e.g., by
a physician) pose a special challenge because losing weight is dictated by an
external source and is not an internalized goal. Weight loss takes a great deal of
dedication from within the individual, and these athletes may need to work
closely with a mental health professional or registered dietitian to help them
meet their goal.
TABLE 11.5 Classification of Adult Weight by Body Mass Index
(BMI) and Associated Disease Risk
647
