quadriceps may vary based on the exercises that are chosen (101, 153, 190).
Thus, it is up to the strength and conditioning professional to understand how
each exercise may affect muscular development and to prescribe exercises
accordingly based on the needs of his or her athletes.
Sport-Specific Exercises
The more similar the training activity is to the actual sport movement, the
greater the likelihood that there will be a positive transfer to that sport (i.e.,
dynamic correspondence) (160, 165). This is the specificity concept, sometimes
confused with the SAID principle. Arguably the SAID principle is more important
than movement specificity; strength and conditioning professionals need to be
mindful of the specific physiological adaptations that are targeted during each
phase of training. Table 18.3 provides examples of resistance training exercises
that relate in varying degrees to the movement patterns of various sports. The
strength and conditioning professional should find this table helpful when trying
to identify sport-specific exercises to ensure dynamic correspondence. For
example, the primary muscles involved in jumping for basketball are the hip and
knee extensors. An athlete can train these muscles by performing the leg press
or back squat, but which exercise is preferable? Certainly, both exercises
strengthen the hip and knee extensors, but because jumping is performed from
an erect body position with balance and weight-bearing forces as considerations,
the back squat is more relevant to jumping and is therefore preferred over the
leg press (12, 84). Additionally, full hip extension is achieved during a squat and
a jump, but this is not the case for all leg press machines. The weightlifting
movements and their derivatives are relevant to jumping because of their quick
movement characteristics, thereby applying a high rate of force development
and power output (16, 87).
TABLE 18.3 Examples of Movement-Related Resistance
Training Exercises
Movement pattern
Related exercises
Ball dribbling and passing
Closed-grip bench press, dumbbell bench press, triceps pushdown, reverse
curl, hammer curl
Ball kicking
Unilateral hip adduction and abduction, single-leg squat, forward step
lunge, leg (knee) extension, leg raise
Freestyle swimming
(including start and turns)
Pull-up, lateral shoulder raise, forward step lunge, upright row, barbell
pullover, single-leg squat
Vertical jumping (ballistic,
slow SSC)
Snatch, power clean, push jerk, back squat, front squat, loaded squat jump,
jump shrug, push press, push jerk
1207
