amino acids), 40 grams of EAA, or a placebo. While the mixed amino
acids and the EAA induced an anabolic response that was
significantly greater than with the placebo treatment, no difference
was observed between the amino acid treatments. Since there was
no difference, it was concluded that nonessential amino acids are
not needed to stimulate muscle protein synthesis. In a follow-up
study, using the same protocol (but with only 6 g EAA and 35 g
sugar), Rasmussen and colleagues (180) demonstrated significantly
greater anabolic drive—that is, the building of new muscle tissue—
with the EAA supplement (when given shortly after resistance
exercise) versus the placebo.
Subsequently, Tipton and colleagues (207) examined the effects
of consuming 6 grams EAA plus 36 grams of sugar, before or after
resistance training, on muscle protein metabolism. They reported
that when the EAA plus sugar was consumed 30 minutes before
resistance training, the acute (3 hr after exercise) anabolic response
was 158% greater than when the EAA and sugar supplement were
consumed after training. As a result of these acute findings, Tipton
and colleagues (207) and Rasmussen and colleagues (180) theorized
that a person who consumed EAA before or after (or both before
and after) every resistance training session over a period of weeks
would experience greater changes in muscle mass than with training
only. It is important to note that although the nonessential amino
acids are not required to stimulate muscle protein synthesis, this
does not mean that they are not important for maximizing training
adaptations in the athlete. The conditionally essential and
nonessential amino acids serve as the substrates that are
incorporated into the newly formed muscle proteins; further, they
also spare the conversion of these amino acids from the essential
ones, thus effectively increasing the levels of EAAs.
Prior work in animal models further identified that of the eight
EAAs, it is the branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs)—isoleucine,
leucine, and valine—that are responsible for increasing muscle
protein synthesis (83). Of the BCAAs, it appears that leucine is the
700
