Adrenal Gland, Cortisol, and Its Role in
Resistance Exercise
The adrenal gland is integral to the body’s adaptation to stress,
particularly during and after exercise. Structurally, it consists of two
main components: the medulla and the cortex, each responding to
stress in distinct ways. The adrenal medulla, the inner core of the
gland, is directly stimulated by the autonomic nervous system during
acute stress. It rapidly secretes catecholamines such as epinephrine
and norepinephrine, alongside dopamine and specific enkephalin-
containing polypeptides like peptide F, which are implicated in
immediate stress responses and immune enhancement (129). The
adrenal cortex is stimulated by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
from the anterior pituitary gland to produce and release cortisol.
Cortisol has critical roles in modulating inflammation and managing
metabolic responses to stress. As such, cortisol is regulated on a
systemic level by the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and
locally within tissues by enzymes such as 11β-hydroxy- steroid
dehydrogenase (11β-HSD) to maintain glucocorticoid balance (25,
27, 99). Cortisol is crucial for sustaining energy during prolonged
stress by facilitating glucose availability through selective glucose
sparing and mobilization, gluconeogenesis, and fat and protein
catabolism. However, prolonged elevation of cortisol levels—if not
returned to baseline within 24 hours—can adversely affect the body,
because cortisol in this context is considered catabolic and anti-
anabolic. Sustained high cortisol can impair immune function, affect
fat metabolism and deposition, reduce protein synthesis, increase
protein degradation, and interfere with anabolic signaling pathways,
thereby promoting a catabolic state that can undermine muscle
repair and growth (75, 87, 89, 92, 129). Interference in anabolic
signaling is partly due to the cortisol significantly contributing to
immune suppression observed after intense exercise stress. Cortisol
is crucial in “inactivating” immune cell functions during recovery
267
