segmental necrosis of muscle fibers; and alterations in connective
tissue, 
T-tubules, 
and 
the 
sarcoplasmic 
reticulum. 
These
morphological changes can result directly from mechanical stress
during exercise or subsequently from calcium-sensitive degradation
pathways and inflammatory responses. EIMD damage is most
pronounced after the first resistance training session and diminishes
rapidly as training continues, becoming negligible after 10 weeks of
consistent resistance training (27, 37). The structural changes
associated with EIMD influence gene expression in an effort to
strengthen muscle tissue and protect it from further damage. The
repair and remodeling process itself may involve a host of regulatory
mechanisms (e.g., hormonal, immune, and metabolic) that interact
with the training status of the individual (90). However, it is
understood that both the inflammatory responses and increased
protein turnover (i.e., increased net protein synthesis) ultimately
contribute to long-term hypertrophic adaptations. The sequence of
protein synthesis involves (a) water uptake, (b) noncontractile
protein synthesis, and (c) contractile protein synthesis (166). At the
same time, reduced degradation acts to maintain the size of fibers
by reducing net protein loss.
After the initiation of a heavy resistance training program,
changes in the type of muscle proteins (e.g., fast myosin heavy
chains) start to take place within several workouts (158). However,
muscle fiber hypertrophy requires a longer period of training (3-4
weeks of 9-12 workouts) before significant changes in CSA become
detectable (40, 150). The hypertrophic process leading to a rise in
CSA will have been occurring molecularly since the initial training
stimulus, but is only observable when those alterations become
measurable. As with initial gains in performance variables (e.g.,
strength and power), hypertrophic responses are at their greatest in
the early stages, after which the rate of muscle growth diminishes
over time (72). Athletes studied across two years of heavy resistance
training showed increases in strength that paralleled optimal training
301
