cardiologists for the treatment of a wide variety of cardiovascular
diseases, including hypertension. The ergogenic benefit of these
drugs may reside in their ability to reduce anxiety and tremors
during performance (138). Thus, athletes who rely on steady,
controlled movements during performance (i.e., archers or
marksmen) would appear to benefit from these drugs. Also, β-
blockers may improve physiological adaptations from aerobic
endurance training by causing an upregulation of β-receptors. If this
is true, it would result in an exaggerated response to sympathetic
discharge during intense exercise on cessation of supplementation.
Efficacy
Several studies have shown that β-blockers can improve both slow
and fast shooting accuracy (7, 135). In addition, the dose taken
appears to have significant effects on the magnitude of
improvement. In shooters who administered β-blockers in two
different doses (80 mg vs. 40 mg of oxprenolol), the group taking
the higher dose shot with greater accuracy (7). In certain sports,
however, some degree of anxiety may be important. Tesch (205)
reported that bowlers whose performance was improved during
blockade with oxprenolol had significantly greater heart rates before,
during, and after competition than subjects whose performance did
not improve while on β-blockers.
Impact of Alcohol on Performance
Both acute and chronic alcohol consumption can impede exercise performance by
adversely affecting several physiological processes critical toward optimizing
performance and recovery. Perhaps most obviously, acute alcohol consumption can
impair performance in skilled tasks by effects on fine motor control, reaction time,
judgment, and arousal (191). However, acute alcohol consumption has also been
shown to impede skeletal muscle metabolism, recovery, and adaptation. For
example, isometric and dynamic strength loss induced by strenuous eccentric
exercise is exacerbated by high-dose postexercise alcohol consumption (~6.3
standard drinks over 1.5 hours, where a standard drink contains 14 g of pure
alcohol) in young men (14), although strength trained women may be protected
from this effect (137). Similarly, mechanistic studies suggest that acute high-dose
697
