the higher-carbohydrate diet and higher-carbohydrate plus extra calories diet led
to significantly greater levels of glycogen than the habitual diet. However, in
women, only the higher-carbohydrate plus extra calories diet resulted in
significant increases in glycogen storage compared to the habitual diet. In the
high-carbohydrate conditions, men increased their total carbohydrate intake to
7.9 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight, whereas women reached
just 6.4 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight. No differences were
noted between men and women in their ability to use glycogen as measured by
enzymatic activity. Therefore, the failure of previous studies to show improved
performance from carbohydrate loading in women was likely due to inadequate
overall carbohydrate intake (132). This theory (that women were not consuming
enough total carbohydrate in many of the protocols) was backed up in a study
examining female cyclists. In trained female cyclists, three or four days on a
moderate-carbohydrate diet (48% of calories from carbohydrates) followed by
three or four days consuming 78% of calories from carbohydrates (8.14 g of
carbohydrate per kilogram body weight) led to significant increases in glycogen
stores and greater cycling time to exhaustion compared to seven days on the
moderate-carbohydrate diet (142). Researchers have found that glycogen
storage capacity in the 4-hour time period after exercise did not differ between
men and women when they consumed the same amount of carbohydrate per
unit body weight (1 g of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight immediately and
1 hour after the completion of exercise) (130). And while glycogen storage
capacity is greater during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle in women as
compared to the early follicular phase due to hormonal differences, carbohydrate
loading and increased carbohydrate intake can make up for this difference (99).
The main challenge with carbohydrate loading in females appears to be their
overall daily calorie intake. Women who habitually consume less than 2,400
calories per day may find it difficult to consume greater amounts of
carbohydrate. Therefore, female athletes may need to increase their total energy
intake above 2,400 calories, in addition to consuming a higher-carbohydrate diet,
in order to increase glycogen stores (129, 142).
Though the majority of studies on carbohydrate loading have been done in
aerobic endurance athletes, some research has attempted to examine
carbohydrate loading for athletes in high-intensity sports as well. In a
randomized, crossover design, seven professional soccer players who consumed
an average of 46% of calories from carbohydrates ate either a 39% or a 65%
carbohydrate diet two days before being testing. Each test consisted of 6,858
meters (7,500 yd) of field work (completed at 65%, 57%, and 81% V̇ O2max)
followed by a treadmill run to exhaustion in an attempt to mimic a soccer game.
After the high-carbohydrate diet, the players ran 17.1 kilometers (10.6 miles)
622
