professional to consider that plyometric session design is not limited
to actions purely in the sagittal plane, and the transition from one
foot to two feet, two feet to one foot, one foot to the other, or one
leg to the same leg are often as important for performance
enhancement as two-footed actions.
Aerobic endurance athletes can also benefit from participation in a
plyometric training program, because repetitive efforts that have
neurophysiological and mechanical properties to optimize movement
efficiency improve running and cycling economy by allowing muscles
to produce more force with less energy.
The various lower body plyometric drills have differing intensity
levels and directional movements. The types of lower body
plyometric drills include singular and repetitive actions (e.g.,
bounds) using one foot (hop) or both feet (jump), which may be
transitional, in-place, or involve objects such as a box (e.g., a box
jump) or hurdle. See table 19.2 for a description of these drills.
TABLE 19.2 Lower Body Plyometric Drills
Type
Description
Hops
Takeoff from one foot and landing on the same foot. Volume is either
measured by distance traveled or number of foot contacts. This movement
develops acceleration and deceleration capabilities in a single limb, with
intensity defined by displacement velocity and volume defined by foot
contacts. These drills may be singular (ballistic hop) that is in place or
horizontal, or reactive (multiple repetitive actions for height or distance).
Bounds
Takeoff from one foot and landing, or transitioning through, to the other foot.
Depending on the training status of the athlete (rehab vs. performance), these
drills may be singular (ballistic bound) or reactive (multiple repetitive actions
with alternating ground contact). Bounds may result in greater horizontal
velocity than hops and jumps and therefore are ideal for developing
accelerations and decelerations with bilateral weight transfer. Intensity is
defined by the horizontal velocity of the action. Volume is typically measured
by distance but may be through the number of repetitions performed.
Jumps
Takeoff and landing with two feet that may be horizontal or vertical in nature.
The height or length of a jump determines the intensity of the action. Volume
is determined by the number of foot contacts. Jumps may be in place, have
1271
