temperature, especially in combination with high humidity, can
impair endurance exercise performance, pose health risks, and lower
the validity of an aerobic endurance exercise test. Aerobic endurance
performance (29, 35) and intermittent sprint performance (17) may
be impaired when the temperature approaches 80 °F (27 °C),
especially if the humidity exceeds 50% (20). The effects of
temperature and humidity on testing performance can create
problems for comparing the results of tests administered at different
times of year, on different days, and even at different times of day.
For example, the maximal oxygen uptake of an athlete impaired by
the heat is underestimated by the 1.5-mile (2.4 km) run test. Run
times can also be impaired by cold temperatures. Thus, outdoor
aerobic endurance tests may be inappropriate at locations
characterized by wide fluctuations in temperature. In such places,
aerobic endurance tests can be administered on an indoor track, if
available, or with a treadmill or stationary cycle.
Altitude can also impair performance on aerobic endurance tests,
although not on tests of strength and power (24). Norms on aerobic
endurance tests should be adjusted when testing at altitudes
exceeding 1,900 feet (579 m). Up to about 9,000 feet (2,743 m),
maximal oxygen uptake declines by approximately 5% for each
3,000 feet (914 m) of elevation (25). At even higher altitudes,
maximal oxygen uptake declines more sharply. Athletes who arrive
at a relatively high altitude after living near sea level for an extended
period of time should be given at least 10 days to acclimate before
undergoing aerobic endurance tests (34). For all testing, it is good
practice to measure and document the environmental conditions and
then to consider these factors when interpreting the results.
Athletes’ experience, training status, age, and sex can
affect test performance, so these factors should be
considered in test selection. Environmental factors such
as temperature, humidity, and altitude can also
influence test performance, so testers should try to
750
