Strength-to-Mass Ratio
In sport activities such as sprinting and jumping, the ratio of the
strength of the muscles involved in the movement to the mass of the
body parts being accelerated is critical. Thus, the strength-to-mass
ratio directly reflects an athlete’s ability to accelerate his or her body.
If, after training, an athlete increases body mass by 15% but
increases force capability by only 10%, the strength-to-mass ratio,
and thus the athlete’s ability to accelerate, is reduced. A sprinter or
jumper may benefit by experimenting with muscle mass to
determine the highest strength-to-mass ratio, which would result in
the best possible performance.
In sports involving weight classification, the strength-to-mass
ratio is extremely important. If all competitors have close to the
same body mass, the strongest one has a decided advantage. It is
normal for the strength-to-mass ratio of larger athletes to be lower
than that of smaller athletes because when body size increases,
muscle volume (and concomitantly body weight) increases
proportionately more than does muscle cross-sectional area (and
concomitantly strength) (12). Trial and error can help athletes
determine the weight category in which their strength is highest
relative to that of other athletes in the weight class. Once an athlete
finds his or her most competitive weight class, the object is to
become as strong as possible without exceeding the class weight
limit.
Body Size
It has long been observed that, all else being equal, smaller athletes
are stronger pound for pound than larger athletes (12). The reason
is that a muscle’s maximal contractile force is fairly proportional to its
cross-sectional area, which is related to the square (second power)
of linear body dimensions, whereas a muscle’s mass is proportional
to its volume, which is related to the cube (third power) of linear
body dimensions. Therefore, as body size increases, body mass
increases more rapidly than does muscular strength. Given constant
146
