uses all the senses to create a mental experience of an athletic
performance. The athlete simulates reality by mentally rehearsing a
movement, imagining visual, auditory, kinesthetic, olfactory, and
even gustatory (taste) cues. Feltz and Landers (16) provided
convincing evidence for the effectiveness of mental imagery in the
enhancement of sport skill based on a meta-analytic review of the
literature. During the initial stages of using imagery, the athlete may
start with a relatively simple, somewhat familiar visual image. This
helps successful practice of the technique. As with learning any skill
by proceeding from simple to complex, the person starts with static
images, such as visualizing a golf ball or mentally examining the
visual characteristics of a tennis racket. The vividness or detail of the
image should become clearer and clearer with continued practice.
Some people have a natural talent for achieving image clarity, but
everyone can improve with repeated practice.
The perspective of the image can be internal (first person) or
external (third person). Although the research literature is unclear as
to whether one is superior, it seems that an image that is more
engaging and natural to the athlete would be most appropriate. Of
course, the internal, first-person perspective seems more specific to
skill execution, inasmuch as the actual task is performed with such
an orientation. However, because many athletes are familiar with
reviewing film or recordings of their performances, an external
perspective may also feel natural.
After the athlete successfully visualizes a stationary object with
vivid detail, he or she may start to move the object or begin to walk
around it in the mind, viewing it from a number of different
perspectives. For an image such as a basketball, the athlete may
attempt to bounce the ball and feel it against the fingertips. In this
manner, the athlete increases complexity by controlling the image or
moving it with control (e.g., bouncing the ball) and by bringing a
multisensory perspective to bear (i.e., using tactile or kinesthetic as
well as visual sensation).
495
