For opening and closing procedures, policies are typically based
on the daily operations, inspection, and cleaning of the strength and
conditioning facility. Additionally, consider designating specific
operating procedures for holidays or for the institution’s academic
calendar, stereo or music use, office hours, storage, and staff locker
room activities. Again, these written principles are intended to
enhance facility efficiency while promoting program effectiveness
(30).
Figure 26.6  Facility rules and guidelines.
Before participation, athletes must go through a preparticipation screening
and clearance procedure (5).
Before participation, all athletes must attend an orientation on common risks
involved in resistance training, the proper execution of various exercises,
and the possible consequences if proper technique is not used.
Athletes must have a training program, follow it, and record training
contents.
If an athlete has an injury that inhibits a portion of the training program, the
athlete must receive a modified program from the sports medicine
department that describes which exercises should be avoided and which
ones may be substituted.
Athletes are required to use locks on the ends of all barbells.
No one should squat outside the squat or power rack.
Bumper plates are required on the platforms for all power exercises.
Athletes must not wear weight belts when the belts could contact equipment
upholstery.
Athletes should move weights from the racks to the bar only. They should
never set plates on the floor or lean them against equipment or walls.
Athletes should return dumbbells to the rack in the proper order. Athletes
should not drop or throw weights or dumbbells.
Athletes should show respect for equipment and facilities at all times;
spitting in or defacing the facility is not tolerated and will result in immediate
expulsion.
The weight room requires concentration. Horseplay, loud or offensive
language, or temper tantrums are not permitted.
The staff offices and telephones are off limits to athletes unless permission
to use them is given.
1811
