G. Gregory Haff, PhD, CSCS,*D, FNSCA
To my coeditor and life-long friend, Travis Triplett: It is hard to
believe all that we have accomplished across our careers and with
this project. While editing a book of this magnitude is challenging
and at times very frustrating, your ability to remain positive and
focused on the end goal is inspiring. The balancing act of editing this
book can only be accomplished with two people that complement
each other’s strengths and believe in the NSCA. I can think of no one
other than you who I would want to attempt a project like this with.
Your kind heart and easygoing style is a perfect complement to my
“bull in a China shop” methodology for processes like this. Thanks
for always being one of my very best friends, and the next margarita
is on me!
I must thank my family. My wife Erin who has been by my side for
well over two decades pushing me to be the best I can be and
providing me the love and support that I need to continue to chase
my dreams and undertake projects like this. Without her support I
would merely be stuck under the heavy lifting bar of life. It is a
blessing to have someone strong enough to spot you when times are
tough, and for that I love you more than you know. For my father,
Guy Haff; the US Marine Corp values you instilled within me from a
young age have served as the foundation for all things that I do and
after all these years I truly get why you were disappointed that I did
follow in your footsteps into the Marine Corp. It is hard to believe
the training that you had me do at the West Morris YMCA at 11
years of age would set the foundation for my life’s work. Finally, I
must dedicate my efforts to my mother, Sandra Haff who pushed me
to read as many books as I could to overcome my reading
deficiencies, to always be physically ready for whatever is around the
corner, and to fight for what is right no matter the cost. No matter
where you are now, I hope you are still proud of the man I am and
the man I strive to be each and every day. I miss you much, Mom,
36
